5032 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND solely responsible for ensuring that your both copies to the Dockets Management
HUMAN SERVICES comment does not include any Staff. If you do not wish your name and
confidential information that you or a contact information to be made publicly
Food and Drug Administration third party may not wish to be posted, available, you can provide this
such as medical information, your or information on the cover sheet and not
21 CFR Part 1160 anyone else’s Social Security number, or in the body of your comments and you
confidential business information, such must identify this information as
[Docket No. FDA–2024–N–5471]
as a manufacturing process. Please note ‘‘confidential.’’ Any information marked
RIN 0910–AI76 that if you include your name, contact as ‘‘confidential’’ will not be disclosed
information, or other information that except in accordance with 21 CFR 10.20
Tobacco Product Standard for Nicotine
identifies you in the body of your and other applicable disclosure law. For
Yield of Cigarettes and Certain Other
comments, that information will be more information about FDA’s posting
Combusted Tobacco Products
posted on https://www.regulations.gov. of comments to public dockets, see 80
AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, • If you want to submit a comment FR 56469, September 18, 2015, or access
Department of Health and Human with confidential information that you the information at: https://
Services (HHS). do not wish to be made available to the www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2015-
ACTION: Proposed rule. public, submit the comment as a 09-18/pdf/2015-23389.pdf.
written/paper submission and in the
Docket: For access to the docket to
SUMMARY: The Food and Drug manner detailed (see ‘‘Written/Paper read background documents or the
Administration (FDA, the Agency, or Submissions’’ and ‘‘Instructions’’). electronic and written/paper comments
we) is proposing a tobacco product Written/Paper Submissions received, go to https://
standard that would regulate nicotine www.regulations.gov and insert the
Submit written/paper submissions as
yield by establishing a maximum docket number, found in brackets in the
follows:
nicotine level in cigarettes and certain • Mail/Hand Delivery/Courier (for heading of this document, into the
other combusted tobacco products. FDA ‘‘Search’’ box and follow the prompts
written/paper submissions): Dockets
is proposing this action to reduce the and/or go to the Dockets Management
Management Staff (HFA–305), Food and
addictiveness of these products, thus Staff, 5630 Fishers Lane, Rm. 1061,
Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers
giving people who are addicted and Rockville, MD 20852, 240–402–7500.
Lane, Rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852.
wish to quit the ability to do so more • For written/paper comments Go to the Federal eRulemaking Portal
easily. The proposed product standard submitted to the Dockets Management at https://www.regulations.gov for
is anticipated to benefit the population Staff, FDA will post your comment, as access to the rulemaking docket,
as a whole. For example, it would help well as any attachments, except for including any background documents
to prevent people who experiment with information submitted, marked, and and the plain-language summary of the
cigarettes and cigars from developing identified, as confidential, if submitted proposed rule of not more than 100
addiction and using combusted tobacco as detailed in ‘‘Instructions.’’ words in length required by the
products regularly. Instructions: All submissions received Providing Accountability Through
DATES: Either electronic or written must include the Docket No. FDA– Transparency Act of 2023.
comments on the proposed rule must be 2024–N–5471 for ‘‘Tobacco Product Submit comments on the information
submitted by September 15, 2025. Standard for Nicotine Yield of Cigarettes collection under the Paperwork
Submit comments (including and Certain Other Combusted Tobacco Reduction Act of 1995 to the Office of
recommendations) on the collection of Products.’’ Received comments, those Management and Budget (OMB) at
information under the Paperwork filed in a timely manner (see https://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/
Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA) by ADDRESSES), will be placed in the docket PRAMain. Find this particular
September 15, 2025. and, except for those submitted as information collection by selecting
ADDRESSES: You may submit comments ‘‘Confidential Submissions,’’ publicly ‘‘Currently under Review—Open for
as follows. Please note that late, viewable at https://www.regulations.gov Public Comments’’ or by using the
untimely filed comments will not be or at the Dockets Management Staff search function. The title of this
considered. The https:// between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday proposed collection is ‘‘Tobacco
www.regulations.gov electronic filing through Friday, 240–402–7500. Product Standard for Nicotine Yield of
system will accept comments until • Confidential Submissions—To Cigarettes and Certain Other Combusted
11:59 p.m. Eastern Time at the end of submit a comment with confidential Tobacco Products.’’
September 15, 2025. Comments received information that you do not wish to be
FORFURTHERINFORMATIONCONTACT:
by mail/hand delivery/courier (for made publicly available, submit your
With regard to the proposed rule: Nate
written/paper submissions) will be comments only as a written/paper
Mease or Dhanya John, Center for
considered timely if they are received submission. You should submit two
Tobacco Products, Food and Drug
on or before that date. copies total. One copy will include the
Administration, 10903 New Hampshire
information you claim to be confidential
Electronic Submissions Ave., Silver Spring, MD 20993–0002,
with a heading or cover note that states
877–287–1373, CTPRegulations@
Submit electronic comments in the ‘‘THIS DOCUMENT CONTAINS
fda.hhs.gov.
following way: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.’’ The
• Federal eRulemaking Portal: Agency will review this copy, including With regard to the information
collection: JonnaLynn Capezzuto, Office
https://www.regulations.gov. Follow the the claimed confidential information, in
of Operations, Food and Drug
instructions for submitting comments. its consideration of comments. The
Administration, Three White Flint
Comments submitted electronically, second copy, which will have the
North, 10A–12M, 11601 Landsdown St.,
including attachments, to https:// claimed confidential information
North Bethesda, MD 20852, 301–796–
www.regulations.gov will be posted to redacted/blacked out, will be available
3794, PRAStaff@fda.hhs.gov.
the docket unchanged. Because your for public viewing and posted on
comment will be made public, you are https://www.regulations.gov. Submit SUPPLEMENTARYINFORMATION:
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5033
Table of Contents D. Benefits and Risks to the Population as other combusted tobacco products
a Whole (proposed product standard).
I. Executive Summary E. Approach Concerning Adjustments to As the U.S. District Court for the
A. Purpose of the Proposed Rule Inputs to the Model Accounting for District of Columbia recognized in
B. Summary of the Major Provisions of the Other Tobacco Product Standards
United States v. Philip Morris USA, Inc.
Proposed Rule F. Benefits and Risks to the Population as
C. Legal Authority a Whole Accounting for Other Tobacco et al., 449 F.Supp.2d 1 (D.D.C. 2006),
D. Costs and Benefits Product Standards aff’d in relevant part, 566 F.3d 1095
II. Table of Abbreviations/Commonly Used G. Conclusion (D.C. Cir. 2009), the tobacco industry
Acronyms in This Document IX. Additional Considerations and Requests has long known that nicotine creates
III. Background for Comment and sustains addiction, and the industry
A. Need for the Regulation A. Section 907 of the FD&C Act is dependent on maintaining this
B. Relevant Regulatory History B. Pathways to Market addiction. Id. at 307. The court noted
C. Legal Authority C. Considerations and Request for
how cigarette companies have engaged
IV. Nicotine in Cigarettes and Other Comments on Scope of Products
in extensive research to understand how
Combusted Tobacco Products: D. Considerations and Request for
Addiction, Initiation, Dependence, Comments on the Potential for Illicit nicotine operates within the human
Cessation, Relapse, Health Effects, and Trade body and then designed their cigarettes
Consumer Perceptions X. Description of Proposed Regulation to precisely control nicotine delivery
A. Nicotine Is Addictive A. General Provisions (Proposed Subpart and provide nicotine doses to create and
B. The Developing Brain’s Vulnerability to A) sustain addiction. Id. at 307–309.
the Effects of Nicotine Leads to B. Product Requirements (Proposed Moreover, the court confirmed that
Progression to Regular Cigarette Use Subpart B) industry documents supported the
Among Youth and Young Adults Who C. Manufacturing Code and Recordkeeping conclusion that these companies ‘‘knew
Experiment Requirements (Proposed Subpart C)
XI. Proposed Effective Date early on in their research that if a
C. Youth and Adult Cigarette Smoking
XII. Preliminary Economic Analysis of cigarette did not deliver a certain
Cessation and Relapse
Impacts amount of nicotine, new smokers would
D. Smoking Cigarettes and Other
Combusted Tobacco Products Causes A. Introduction not become addicted, and ‘confirmed’
Serious Negative Health Effects B. Summary of Costs and Benefits smokers would be able to quit.’’ Id. at
E. Tobacco Product Marketing Has XIII. Analysis of Environmental Impact 219. In fact, the tobacco industry has
XIV. Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995
Contributed to Disparities in Use and had programs in place since the 1960s
XV. Federalism
Health Outcomes to obtain ‘‘any level of nicotine desired’’
XVI. Severability
F. Consumer Knowledge, Attitudes, XVII. Consultation and Coordination With (Ref. 2). These companies sought to
Beliefs, and Perceptions About Nicotine Indian Tribal Governments identify the ‘‘optimum’’ dose needed to
V. History and Perceptions of VLNC
XVIII. References ‘‘satisfy’’ people who smoke cigarettes
Cigarettes
and, thereby, assure their continued
A. History of LNC and VLNC Cigarettes I. Executive Summary
smoking. Philip Morris, 449 F.Supp.2d
B. Consumer Knowledge, Attitudes,
Beliefs, and Perceptions Regarding VLNC A. Purpose of the Proposed Rule at 309–10. This proposed product
Cigarettes and Regulation of Levels of Each year, 480,000 people die standard would seek to set a maximum
Nicotine in Tobacco prematurely from a smoking-attributable nicotine level such that cigarettes and
VI. Rationale for Products Covered by the disease, making tobacco use the leading certain other combusted tobacco
Proposed Product Standard products could no longer create and
cause of preventable disease and death
A. Prevalence and Abuse Potential of sustain this addiction among people
in the United States (Ref. 1). Nearly all
Cigarettes and Other Combusted Tobacco who smoke cigarettes and certain other
these adverse health effects are
Products
combusted tobacco products.
B. Potential for Tobacco Product Switching ultimately the result of addiction to the
The proposed product standard
VII. Discussion of Nicotine-Related Topics nicotine in combusted tobacco products,
would limit the addictiveness of the
A. Approach To Limiting User Exposure to leading to repeated exposure to
most toxic and widely used tobacco
Nicotine toxicants from those products. Nicotine,
B. Scientific Evidence Supports the Target the primary addictive constituent in products, which would have significant
Level of Nicotine tobacco products, can be delivered public health benefits for all age groups.
C. An Immediate Nicotine Reduction The proposal would have cessation
through a variety of products along a
Approach Is Strongly Supported by benefits for adults who use cigarettes
continuum of risk. To protect youth and
Scientific Evidence and certain other combusted tobacco
reduce tobacco-related disease and
D. Scientific Evidence Supports the Use of products, most of whom want to quit
an Analytical Test Method To Determine death, the Agency utilizes a but are repeatedly unsuccessful because
Nicotine Level comprehensive approach to tobacco and
of the highly addictive nature of these
E. Scientific Evidence Supports the nicotine regulation (https://
products (see section IV.A of this
Technical Achievability of the Proposed www.fda.gov/media/174911/download).
document). Because these products
Maximum Nicotine Level Target As part of this comprehensive approach,
F. Proposal Does Not Seek To Limit FDA is proposing a tobacco product would not create and sustain addiction,
Nicotine to Zero users would be able to quit when they
standard that would regulate nicotine
VIII. Determination That the Standard Is would like, something many who use
yield by establishing a maximum
Appropriate for the Protection of the these products currently do not have the
nicotine level in cigarettes1and certain
Public Health ability to do. Additionally, combusted
A. Approach To Estimating Impacts to the tobacco products at minimally addictive
Population as a Whole 1Throughout this document, FDA generally uses
or nonaddictive levels of nicotine would
B. The Likelihood That Nonusers Would the term ‘‘cigarettes’’ to refer to combusted
Start Using Cigarettes or Other cigarettes, unless specifically stated or context remain on the market for those who
indicates that noncombusted cigarettes are currently smoke and would like to
Combusted Tobacco Products
C. The Likelihood That Existing Users referenced. In general, the term is not meant to continue to do so.
Would Reduce Cigarette and Other i m n e c e lu t d th e e a d n e y f i n n o i n ti c o o n m o b f u c s ig te a d re t t o te b a in cc s o e c p t r i o o d n u 9 c 0 ts 0 ( t 3 h ) a o t f It would also help prevent people
Combusted Tobacco Product the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 who experiment with cigarettes or
Consumption or Stop Smoking U.S.C. 387(3)). certain other combusted tobacco
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5034 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
products (mainly youth) from moving on this proposed standard in light of comments, data, and research regarding
beyond experimentation, developing an that update. this proposed scope.
addiction to nicotine, and progressing to FDA is proposing to exclude
B. Summary of the Major Provisions of
regular use of combusted tobacco noncombusted cigarettes, such as HTPs
the Proposed Rule
products as a result of that addiction that meet the definition of a cigarette in
(see section VIII.B of this document). There are currently no tobacco section 900(3) of the Federal Food,
Reducing the number of people who product standards regulating nicotine in Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) (21
experiment with cigarettes or certain tobacco products. The proposed rule U.S.C. 387(3)) from the scope of this
other combusted tobacco products who would establish a maximum level of proposed product standard (proposed
then transition to regular use of these nicotine in cigarettes and certain other §1160.3 includes a definition of
products would prevent severe adverse combusted tobacco products. FDA cigarette). Therefore, ‘‘cigarettes’’ in this
health consequences of long-term issued an Advance Notice of Proposed proposed rule refers to combusted
Rulemaking regarding a potential cigarettes, not HTPs. Based on FDA’s
smoking at the individual level and
nicotine tobacco product standard experience with application review,
result in public health benefits at the
(Nicotine ANPRM), and the Agency certain noncombusted cigarettes
population level. Based on FDA’s
reviewed and analyzed the comments to produce fewer or lower levels of some
population health model, by the year
that ANPRM (83 FR 11818 (March 16, toxicants than combusted cigarettes.
2100, in the United States,
2018)). FDA also conducted an FDA recognizes that tobacco products
approximately 48 million youth and
extensive and robust review of the exist on a continuum of risk, with
young adults who would have otherwise
relevant scientific literature, as combusted cigarettes being the
initiated habitual cigarette smoking
discussed throughout this document. deadliest, and that certain non-
would not as a result of the proposed
FDA is proposing the following combusted cigarettes pose less risk to
product standard. The model also
provisions based on the comments individuals who use cigarettes or certain
projects that more than 12.9 million
received and the Agency’s analysis of other combusted tobacco products or to
additional people who smoke cigarettes
relevant scientific literature. population health than other products
would quit smoking cigarettes21 year
Proposed scope—Given that meeting the definition of a cigarette.
after implementation of the proposed
approximately 28 million adults and Accordingly, FDA requests comments,
product standard; this estimate
380,000 youth in the United States data, and research regarding the
increases to 19.5 million additional
currently smoke cigarettes and the proposal to exclude noncombusted
people within 5 years of
toxicity and addictiveness of these cigarettes from the scope of this
implementation (this includes people
products, cigarettes are the tobacco proposed rule, including any data that
who exclusively smoke cigarettes
product category that causes the largest could justify otherwise.
quitting all tobacco products or amount of harm to public health in the FDA also proposes to exclude
completely switching to noncombusted United States (Refs. 3 and 4). However, waterpipe tobacco from the proposed
tobacco product use, as well as people if a product standard were to cover only product standard because, unlike
who engage in dual use of cigarettes and cigarettes, it is likely that a significant cigarette tobacco, pipe tobacco, RYO
noncombusted tobacco products number of addicted people who smoke tobacco, and cigars (other than premium
quitting cigarette use). In addition, the cigarettes would migrate to other similar cigars), FDA believes there is little risk
model estimates that, by the year 2060, combusted tobacco products after the of switching under the proposed
in the United States, this proposed standard went into effect to maintain product standard. Waterpipes as
product standard would result in 1.8 their nicotine exposure, thereby currently marketed and used generally
million tobacco-related deaths averted, undermining the public health benefits require substantial time for preparation
rising to 4.3 million deaths averted by of the standard (Ref. 5) (see also section and use (i.e., an approximately 1-hour
the end of the century. The reduction in VI.B of this document). Therefore, to session with waterpipes compared to 5–
premature deaths attributable to the increase the public health benefits, we 7 minutes with cigarettes). In addition,
proposed product standard would result are proposing to cover the following they are generally large and unwieldy
in 19.6 million life years gained by 2060 products under this proposed product and thus ill-suited for mobile usage,
and 76.4 million life years gained by standard: Cigarettes (other than such as while driving or walking. FDA
2100. For the reasons discussed in the noncombusted cigarettes, such as heated requests comments, data, and research
preamble, FDA finds that the proposed tobacco products (HTPs3) that meet the regarding the proposal to exclude
product standard would be appropriate definition of a cigarette), cigarette waterpipe tobacco from the scope of this
for the protection of the public health. tobacco, roll-your-own (RYO) tobacco, proposed rule, including any data that
As explained in section VIII.A., the cigars (including little cigars, cigarillos, could justify otherwise.
population health model uses inputs and large cigars but excluding premium FDA is also not including
derived from available empirical cigars4), and pipe tobacco (other than noncombusted non-cigarette tobacco
evidence and expert opinion to estimate waterpipe tobacco5). FDA requests products, such as electronic nicotine
the impact of this proposed rule. To delivery systems (ENDS) (which include
obtain expert opinion for the model 3Tobacco products that meet the statutory or e-cigarettes) and smokeless tobacco
inputs, FDA conducted a formal expert regulatory definition of a cigarette but are not products, in the scope of this proposed
elicitation process in 2015 and repeated combusted (do not exceed 350 °C) are categorized product standard. As discussed
as ‘‘heated tobacco products’’ (HTPs) for purposes
it in 2018. FDA is conducting another of FDA’s premarket review. HTPs that meet the throughout this document, nicotine is
expert elicitation process and intends to definition of a cigarette must be in compliance with the primary addictive constituent in
publish the results of this update for the applicable statutory and regulatory
public review and additional comment requirements for cigarettes, unless otherwise noted tobacco, maassel, shisha, narghile, or argileh)
in a marketing authorization order (Ref. 6). typically contains a mixture of tobacco, sweeteners,
4See section III.B.3 of this document. and flavoring. The hookah device (or waterpipe)
2For the purposes of this proposed rule, where 5Waterpipe tobacco (also known as hookah used to smoke the hookah tobacco works by passing
describing expected transition behaviors, we also tobacco) is a type of tobacco product that produces charcoal or electric heated air through the tobacco
use the shorter phrase ‘‘quit smoking’’ to refer to smoke that people inhale when a hookah device is mixture and ultimately through a water-filled
stopping use of combusted cigarettes. heated. Hookah tobacco (also known as waterpipe chamber (Ref. 7).
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5035
tobacco products, and it is the nicotine nicotine in smoke, in other words, the contain ≤ 1.0 mg nicotine per gram of
in such products that both creates and amount of nicotine to which a smoker total tobacco, ‘‘low nicotine content
sustains addiction and ultimately leads potentially is exposed. While nicotine (LNC) cigarettes’’ refers to cigarettes
to the significant adverse health effects yield can be measured through with > 1.0 mg and < 11.4 mg nicotine
caused by these products. While these machine-generated smoking methods per gram of total tobacco, and ‘‘normal
effects raise concerns in the context of (e.g., International Organization for nicotine content (NNC) cigarettes’’ refers
any tobacco product—none of which is Standardization (ISO) machine smoking to cigarettes with ≥ 11.4 mg nicotine per
without risk—at this time, FDA is method, Canadian Intense (CI) smoking gram of total tobacco.7FDA uses these
focusing this proposed rule on nicotine method, Federal Trade Commission acronyms in places where we have
levels in cigarettes and certain other (FTC) smoking method), it can vary due confirmed that the nicotine content of
combusted tobacco products because to a user’s compensatory behaviors— the cigarettes referenced meets these
combusted tobacco products are e.g., inhaling more deeply, taking larger definitions. In documents that reference
responsible for the majority of death and puffs, and blocking cigarette features nicotine content in tobacco, but do not
disease due to tobacco use. FDA expects designed to reduce nicotine yield—such specify the levels of nicotine and
that, if this proposed rule is finalized as that users can increase the amount of therefore cannot be confirmed to meet
proposed, many people who smoke nicotine yield compared to the machine- these definitions, we have maintained
cigarettes will quit smoking, either by generated yield. In contrast, nicotine the full description that best reflects
quitting all tobacco use or by completely ‘‘content,’’ which refers to the amount of what was used in the original document
switching to a noncombusted tobacco nicotine present in tobacco filler, is not (e.g., low nicotine content tobacco).
product. Those who switch completely affected by smoking behavior or FDA is not seeking to require the
to use of a noncombusted tobacco cigarette design features. Reducing the reduction of nicotine yields in any
product may sustain their nicotine nicotine content to the proposed 0.70 tobacco product to zero, which would
dependence but may significantly mg of nicotine per gram of total tobacco violate section 907(d)(3) of the FD&C
reduce their risk of tobacco-related limit in the finished tobacco products Act (21 U.S.C. 387g(d)(3)). FDA requests
death and disease because switching subject to this proposed product comments, data, and research regarding
completely to a noncombusted tobacco standard places an absolute maximum this proposed maximum nicotine level.
product would reduce exposure to the limit on the amount of nicotine present Immediate nicotine reduction
chemical constituents created through in tobacco smoke available for intake by approach—FDA is proposing an
combustion, which are currently the users of these products. There are many immediate nicotine reduction (i.e.,
primary contributors of tobacco-related different tobacco product characteristics single target) approach to reach the
harm (Ref. 8). Importantly, this action that can be manipulated to affect proposed maximum nicotine level
would also help to prevent people who (rather than a gradual reduction, or
nicotine yield, one of which is nicotine
experiment with cigarettes and cigars stepped-down, approach) to limit
content. Setting a limit on nicotine
(mainly youth) from moving beyond additional toxicant exposure. Based on
content and measuring that content is
experimentation, developing an studies involving VLNC cigarettes and
more effective in reducing yield (i.e., the
addiction to nicotine, and progressing to other reduced nicotine content (RNC)
amount of nicotine the user is exposed
regular use of combusted tobacco cigarettes, we expect that there would
to) than setting a limit based on a direct
products as a result of that addiction. be very little or no compensatory
measurement of yield under
We request comments, data, and smoking (and, consequently, additional
standardized smoking-machine
research regarding the proposed scope limited toxicant exposure) with an
protocols because nicotine content
of this rule. immediate reduction approach, as
cannot be affected by the compensatory
For further discussion regarding opposed to a gradual reduction
behavior described above. Therefore,
considerations and request for approach which showed evidence of
limiting nicotine yield through a
comments on the proposed scope of this increased compensatory smoking. As
maximum nicotine content level would
rule, see section IX.C of this document. such, an immediate reduction approach
better achieve the public health benefits
Proposed product standard for would increase the benefits of the
that come from reducing the amount of
nicotine—FDA is proposing to make proposed product standard. FDA also
the nicotine to which a user is exposed
cigarettes and certain other combusted notes that this immediate nicotine
than would setting a limit based on a
tobacco products minimally addictive or reduction approach would reduce
measurement of the maximum machine-
nonaddictive6by limiting the nicotine manufacturing costs for those products
measured yield of tobacco products. For
yield of these products. We propose to covered by the proposed standard
further discussion, see section VII.A.
limit nicotine yield by setting a because manufacturers would not have
maximum nicotine content level of 0.70 The proposed limit of 0.70 mg of reason to formulate multiple products
milligrams (mg) of nicotine per gram of nicotine per gram of total tobacco is and then prepare and submit premarket
total tobacco in these tobacco products. based on FDA’s analysis of studies review applications at each phase of a
For comparison, the average nicotine regarding the likely effects of reducing gradual reduction approach. We request
content in the top 100 cigarette brands nicotine, which shows that extended comments, data, and information
for 2017 is 17.2 mg/g of total tobacco exposure to very low nicotine content regarding the selection of an immediate
(Ref. 9). Nicotine yield is the amount of (VLNC) combusted cigarettes is reduction approach.
associated with reduced addiction Analytical test method—To assist
6FDA is using the term ‘‘nonaddictive’’ potential, dependence levels, number of FDA in determining compliance with
throughout this preamble specifically in the context cigarettes smoked per day and increased this rule, the proposed product standard
of the available data on very low nicotine content quit attempts among people who would require manufacturers to analyze
cigarettes. We acknowledge the highly addictive
currently smoke cigarettes, without potential of nicotine itself depending upon the
route of delivery. As discussed elsewhere in this increasing toxicant exposure, craving, 7The term VLNC should not be confused with the
preamble, questions remain with respect to the withdrawal, or compensatory smoking. cigarette brand name ‘‘VLN;’’ ‘‘VLN’’ refers to
precise level of nicotine in cigarettes that might Throughout this preamble, ‘‘VLNC cigarette products authorized for marketing by FDA
render them either minimally addictive or in 2019. See https://www.fda.gov/media/133633/
cigarettes’’ refers to combusted
nonaddictive for specific individual members or download?attachment and https://www.fda.gov/
segments of the population. cigarettes that have been reported to media/133635/download?attachment.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5036 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
the nicotine levels of cigarettes and manufacturing code for tobacco however, they would not be permitted
certain other combusted tobacco products. However, the proposed to sell off such stock after the effective
products covered by the rule using an regulation Requirements for Tobacco date. FDA believes this approach would
analytical test method that has been Product Manufacturing Practice (TPMP) allow adequate time for developing any
validated in an analytical test (see https://www.federalregister.gov/ necessary changes in technology or
laboratory. In addition, FDA is documents/2023/03/10/2023-04591/ inputs to comply with a finalized
proposing to require product testing requirements-for-tobacco-product- product standard. It also would provide
prior to commercial distribution in the manufacturing-practice) includes a sufficient time for tobacco product
United States to prevent nonconforming requirement for a manufacturing code, manufacturers to submit, and FDA to
tobacco products from entering the and this rulemaking’s provision is review, applications for new tobacco
stream of commerce and reaching modeled on the proposed TPMP products that comply with the finalized
consumers. provision. The proposed product product standard. Additionally, FDA
Sampling plan—The proposed standard would require the use of a believes that this approach would allow
product standard would require tobacco manufacturing code to serve as a adequate time for making any changes
product manufacturers to design and common identifier for production and to tobacco purchasing choices and
implement a sampling plan that covers distribution records. The purpose of the curing methods, and for preparation or
each batch of finished tobacco product8 manufacturing code is to allow changes needed in facilities and
that they manufacture. This sampling manufacturers and FDA to identify the processes. FDA requests comments and
plan would be based on a valid production batch of a particular finished data on this proposed effective date. For
scientific rationale (such as product that has been released for further discussion regarding
representative sampling) to ensure that distribution. This information is considerations and request for
each product complies with the intended to help determine the comments on the proposed effective
proposed product standard. This product’s history (e.g., batch production date of this rule, see section XI of this
sampling plan would provide records) and assist manufacturers and document.
procedures for the manufacturer to FDA in the event of a nonconforming Given that any new tobacco products
select samples to demonstrate tobacco product investigation and any that comply with this product standard
conformance to the proposed product corrective actions to be taken by a would be required to undergo premarket
standard requirement. The required manufacturer as a result of the review, FDA is considering options for
procedures would help ensure that investigation. addressing any influx of applications.
products that do not conform to the Recordkeeping requirements—To
C. Legal Authority
product standard are not sold or assist FDA in determining compliance
distributed to consumers. with the rule and aid in nonconforming Section 907 of the FD&C Act
Nonconforming tobacco product— product investigations, the proposed authorizes FDA to adopt tobacco
The proposed product standard would product standard would require that product standards, including product
require tobacco product manufacturers manufacturers establish and maintain standards that include provisions for
to establish procedures for the control records regarding the results of testing nicotine yields; for the reduction or
and disposition of tobacco products that conducted on each batch to determine elimination of other constituents
do not conform to the requirements of conformance with the proposed (including smoke constituents) or
this rule. These procedures are standard. In addition, this proposed harmful components; respecting the
necessary to help prevent the product standard would require that construction, components, ingredients,
distribution of nonconforming tobacco manufacturers maintain records of additives, constituents (including smoke
products by ensuring that all potential sampling plans and sampling constituents), and properties of tobacco
nonconforming products are identified, procedures, records related to products; for the testing of tobacco
investigated, and segregated and that manufacturing controls, and all records products; and for restricting the sale of
appropriate disposition and followup related to its analytical test method tobacco products to the extent
are taken for products determined to be validation. FDA also is proposing to consistent with section 906 (21 U.S.C.
nonconforming. This proposed require that it be possible to identify the 387f) (section 907(a)(3), (a)(4)(A)(i) to
requirement would ensure that any production batch of a particular finished (iii), and (a)(4)(B)(i) to (ii) and (iv) to
reports of nonconforming products, product that has been released for (v)). The FD&C Act also establishes
whether as a result of manufacturer distribution. FDA’s authority to require tobacco
testing or otherwise, are examined and Proposed effective date—FDA product manufacturers to establish and
investigated and that appropriate proposes that any final rule that may maintain records in section 909 (21
measures are taken to ensure that issue based on this proposed rule U.S.C. 387i); authority related to
nonconforming products are not become effective 2 years after the date adulterated and misbranded tobacco
distributed to consumers and to prevent of publication of the final rule. products in sections 902 and 903 (21
future nonconformity. Therefore, after the effective date no U.S.C. 387b and 387c); authority
Manufacturing code—Currently, there person could distribute, sell, or offer for regarding premarket review of new
is no requirement for the use of a sale or distribution within the United tobacco products in section 910 (21
States finished tobacco products that are U.S.C. 387j); authority related to
8For the purpose of this document, the term not in compliance with part 1160 (21 prohibited acts in section 301 (21 U.S.C.
‘‘finished tobacco product’’ refers to those products CFR part 1160). Prior to the effective 331); and FDA’s rulemaking and
subject to this proposed rule. FDA proposes to date of any final rule that may issue inspection authorities in sections 701
define a ‘‘finished tobacco product’’ to mean a based on this proposed rule, and 704 (21 U.S.C. 371 and 374).
tobacco product, including all components and
wholesalers, retailers, and related parts, sealed in final packaging (e.g., filters or filter
D. Costs and Benefits
tubes sold to consumers separately or as part of kits) entities would be able to sell available
or in the final form in which it is intended to be stock of finished tobacco products were The main quantified benefits come
sold to consumers. For a discussion of products not in compliance with part 1160 while from averted mortality and morbidity as
FDA proposes to include within the scope of this
transitioning inventory in anticipation a result of reduced prevalence for
product standard, see sections IX.C and X.A.1 of
this document. of the effective date of the final rule; people who currently use combusted
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5037
tobacco products, and reduced mortality standard, and on FDA to enforce this annualized benefits over a 40-year time
from reduced exposure to secondhand product standard. In addition to benefits horizon would be $1.1 trillion at a 2
smoke among people. Unquantified and costs, this rule would cause percent discount rate, with a low
benefits include medical cost savings, transfers from the Federal Government estimate of $0.27 trillion and a high
productivity loss savings, reduced and State governments in the form of tax estimate of $1.2 trillion. Over a 40-year
exposure to thirdhand smoke, and revenue, from firms in the form of time horizon, we estimate that the
environmental impacts. We expect this reduced revenue, and transfers between annualized costs would be $2.07 billion
proposed rule, if finalized, to impose or within firms to cover shifts in user at a 2 percent discount rate, with a low
costs on industry to follow the product fee obligations. estimate of $0.7 billion and a high
The annualized monetized benefits
standard, on the broader economy to estimate of $2.73 billion.
over a 40-year time horizon far exceed
repurpose land, labor, and capital, on
the annualized monetized costs over the II. Table of Abbreviations/Commonly
consumers impacted by the product
same time. We estimate that the Used Acronyms in This Document
Abbreviation/
What it means
acronym
3–HPMA ............................... 3-hydroxypropyl mercapturic acid.
AI/AN .................................... American Indians/Alaska Native.
ANPRM ................................ Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking.
BAP ...................................... Benzo[a]pyrene.
CDC ...................................... Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
CFR ...................................... Code of Federal Regulations.
CISNET ................................ Cancer Intervention and Surveillance Modeling Network.
CO ........................................ Carbon monoxide.
COHb ................................... Carboxyhemoglobin.
COPD ................................... Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
CORESTA ............................ Cooperation Centre for Scientific Research Relative to Tobacco.
CPD ...................................... Cigarettes per day.
CPS–I ................................... Cancer Prevention Study I.
CPS–II .................................. Cancer Prevention Study II.
CRM ..................................... CORESTA Recommended Method.
DSM ..................................... Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.
ENDS ................................... Electronic nicotine delivery systems.
E.O. ...................................... Executive Order.
FD&C Act ............................. Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
FDA ...................................... Food and Drug Administration.
FR ......................................... Federal Register.
FTCD .................................... Fagerstro¨m Test for Cigarette Dependence.
FTND .................................... Fagerstro¨m Test for Nicotine Dependence.
GC–MS ................................. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.
HHS ...................................... U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
HPHCs ................................. Harmful and potentially harmful constituents.
HTP ...................................... Heated tobacco product.
IOM ....................................... Institute of Medicine.
LGBTQI+ .............................. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex.
LNC ...................................... Low nicotine content.
mg ........................................ milligram.
MNWS .................................. Minnesota Nicotine Withdrawal Scale.
MRI ....................................... Magnetic resonance imaging.
nAChR .................................. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.
NATS .................................... National Adult Tobacco Survey.
NCI ....................................... National Cancer Institute.
NDSS ................................... Nicotine Dependence Syndrome Scale.
NHANES .............................. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.
NHIS ..................................... National Health Interview Survey.
NHIS–LMF ............................ National Health Interview Survey-Linked Mortality Files.
NIDA ..................................... National Institute on Drug Abuse.
NIH ....................................... National Institutes of Health.
NJATS .................................. New Jersey Adult Tobacco Survey.
NLMS ................................... National Longitudinal Mortality Study.
NNAL .................................... 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanol.
NNC ...................................... Normal nicotine content.
NNN ...................................... N-Nitrosonornicotine.
NPRM ................................... Notice of proposed rulemaking.
NRC ...................................... National Research Council.
NRT ...................................... Nicotine replacement therapy.
NSDUH ................................. National Survey on Drug Use and Health.
NYTS .................................... National Youth Tobacco Survey.
OOS ..................................... Out-of-specification.
PAH ...................................... Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon.
PATH .................................... Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health.
PET ...................................... Position emission tomography.
PD ........................................ Product static ID number.
QALYs .................................. Quality-adjusted life years.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 22:10 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5038 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Abbreviation/
What it means
acronym
QSU ...................................... Questionnaire of Smoking Urges.
RCT ...................................... Randomized clinical trial.
RNC ...................................... Reduced nicotine content.
RR ........................................ Relative risk.
RYO ...................................... Roll-your-own.
S–PMA ................................. S-phenylmercapturic acid.
SE ......................................... Substantial Equivalence.
SES ...................................... Socioeconomic status.
STN ...................................... Submission tracking number.
TNE ...................................... Total nicotine equivalents.
TPSAC ................................. Tobacco Products Scientific Advisory Committee.
TUS–CPS ............................. Tobacco Use Supplement to the Current Population Survey.
U.S. ...................................... United States.
VLNC .................................... Very low nicotine content.
WISDM ................................. Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives.
YRBS .................................... Youth Risk Behavior Survey.
III. Background standards. On March 16, 2018, FDA sustain addiction. Id. at 307–309.
issued a Nicotine ANPRM to seek input Moreover, the court confirmed that
A. Need for the Regulation
on the potential public health benefits industry documents supported the
Cigarettes are responsible for the and any possible adverse effects of conclusion that these companies ‘‘knew
majority of tobacco-related death and regulating nicotine yield by lowering early on in their research that if a
disease in the United States. Each year, nicotine levels in cigarettes and invited cigarette did not deliver a certain
480,000 people die prematurely from a comments on many issues associated amount of nicotine, new smokers would
smoking-attributable disease, putting a with the development of a product not become addicted, and ‘confirmed’
substantial burden on the U.S. standard to establish a maximum smokers would be able to quit.’’ Id. at
healthcare system and causing massive nicotine level (83 FR 11818). The 219. In fact, the tobacco industry has
economic losses to society (Ref. 1). In Nicotine ANPRM also acknowledged had programs in place since the 1960s
terms of a monetary measure of the that if FDA were to establish a nicotine to obtain ‘‘any level of nicotine desired’’
impact of cigarette smoking on the tobacco product standard that covered (Ref. 2). These companies sought to
public health, in 2018, cigarette only cigarettes, some number of people identify the ‘‘optimum’’ dose needed to
smoking cost the United States more who smoke cigarettes could migrate to ‘‘satisfy’’ people who smoke cigarettes
than $600 billion, including more than other similar combusted tobacco and, thereby, assure their continued
$240 billion in healthcare spending products to maintain their nicotine smoking. Philip Morris 449 F.Supp.2d at
(Ref. 10), nearly $185 billion in lost dependence (or engage in dual use with 309–11. This proposed product standard
productivity from smoking-related other combusted tobacco products), would seek to set a maximum nicotine
illnesses and health conditions (Ref. 10), potentially reducing the positive public level requirement such that cigarettes
nearly $180 billion in lost productivity health impact of such a rule. FDA and certain other combusted tobacco
from smoking-related premature death sought comments on whether the products would no longer be able to
(Refs. 1 and 10), and $7 billion in lost standard therefore should cover other create and sustain this addiction among
productivity from premature death from combusted tobacco products. Based on people who smoke cigarettes.
secondhand smoke exposure (Refs. 1 FDA’s scientific knowledge, extensive The proposed product standard
and 11). The mortality rate among research regarding VLNC cigarettes, and would limit the addictiveness of the
people who currently smoke cigarettes comments submitted in response to this most toxic and widely used products,
is 2 to 3 times as high as that among Nicotine ANPRM, FDA is proposing a which would have significant benefits
individuals who never smoked (Ref. 12). tobacco product standard that would for all age groups. Adults who use
Nicotine, the primary addictive regulate nicotine yield by establishing a tobacco products, most of whom want to
constituent in tobacco products, can be maximum nicotine level in cigarettes quit, are often unsuccessful because of
delivered through a variety of products and certain other combusted tobacco the highly addictive nature of these
along a continuum of risk, with products. products (Ref. 13). Researchers estimate
combusted tobacco products at the most As the U.S. District Court for the that each year, only between 5.4 and 5.6
harmful end of this continuum. To District of Columbia recognized in percent of adults who use cigarettes
protect youth and reduce tobacco- United States v. Philip Morris USA, Inc. successfully quit for good (Ref. 14).
related disease and death, FDA utilizes et al., 449 F.Supp.2d 1 (D.D.C. 2006), Similar analysis of 2022 NHIS data
a comprehensive approach to tobacco aff’d in relevant part, 566 F.3d 1095 indicates that only 8.8 percent of adults
and nicotine regulation. Shortly after (D.C. Cir. 2009), the tobacco industry who formerly smoked cigarettes had
FDA announced its comprehensive has long known that nicotine creates quit smoking cigarettes in the past year
approach in 2017 (https://www.fda.gov/ and sustains addiction, and the industry (Ref. 4). Lowering nicotine to minimally
news-events/press-announcements/fda- is dependent on maintaining this addictive or nonaddictive levels would
announces-comprehensive-regulatory- addiction. Id. at 307. The court noted improve their ability to successfully quit
plan-shift-trajectory-tobacco-related- how cigarette companies have engaged using the products within the proposed
disease-death), the Agency began a in extensive research to understand how scope of this rule. It also would prevent
public dialogue about lowering nicotine nicotine operates within the human people who experiment with cigarettes
levels in combusted cigarettes to body and then designed their cigarettes and non-premium cigars, including
minimally addictive or nonaddictive to precisely control nicotine delivery youth, from moving beyond
levels through achievable product and provide nicotine doses to create and experimentation, developing an
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5039
addiction to nicotine, and progressing to completed development (Refs. 1, 17 to progress to regular use of these products
regular use as a result of that addiction. 19). The developing brain is more as a result of nicotine dependence.
Furthermore, it is well-established that vulnerable to nicotine dependence than The adolescent and young adult brain
secondhand tobacco smoke causes the adult brain is, and the earlier an is more vulnerable to developing
premature death and disease in children individual begins smoking the less nicotine dependence than the adult
and in adults who do not smoke (Ref. likely they are to quit (Ref. 20). brain is; data indicate that nicotine has
15 at p.11). It is estimated that exposure Generally, those who begin smoking stronger rewarding effects in
to secondhand smoke caused 41,280 before the age of 18 are not aware of the adolescents than in adults (Ref. 17).
deaths per year in the United States degree of addictiveness and the full Adolescents who use tobacco and
from 2005 to 2009 (Ref. 1 at Table 12.4). extent of the consequences of smoking initiated use at earlier ages were more
This increased cessation and reduced (Ref. 21). It is clear that many youth likely than those initiating at older ages
initiation, in turn, would result in a who smoke cigarettes want to quit but to report symptoms of tobacco
significant decrease in harms from the have difficulty doing so. An analysis of dependence, putting them at greater risk
products to people who currently or data from the 2015 Youth Risk Behavior for maintaining tobacco product use
would otherwise use cigarettes and Survey (YRBS) looking at youth into adulthood (Ref. 24). Additionally,
certain other combusted tobacco cigarette quit attempts found that 45.4 the earlier that individuals begin
products, as well as harms to people percent of high school students smoking—and therefore the greater
who do not use the products, including currently smoking cigarettes had sought amount of time that individuals
harms caused by secondhand smoke to to quit in the previous year (Ref. 22); experience nicotine dependence—the
both adults and children, harmful 2020 National Youth Tobacco Survey less likely they are to successfully quit
perinatal effects due to parental tobacco (Ref. 27). Evidence indicates that
(NYTS) data were congruent, indicating
use, and fires. exposure to substances such as nicotine
that 68.1 percent of middle and high
Preventing people who do not smoke
can disrupt brain development and have
cigarettes, particularly youth, from school students who smoke cigarettes
long-term consequences for executive
regularly smoking cigarettes due to had sought to quit in the previous year
cognitive functioning (such as decreased
nicotine addiction would allow them to (Ref. 23).
attention and working memory and
avoid the severe adverse health More than half (52.2 percent) of U.S. increased impulsivity) and for the risk
consequences of smoking and would middle and high school students who of developing a substance use disorder
result in significant public health use cigarettes, cigars, smokeless and various mental health problems
benefits. Without changes like those tobacco—including those with low (particularly affective disorders such as
proposed here, an estimated 3.66 levels of use—report experiencing at anxiety and depression) as an adult (Ref.
million youth under the age of 18 who least one symptom of nicotine 27). Furthermore, the 2010 Surgeon
were alive in 2018—and 2.54 million dependence (Ref. 24). Notably, 12.7 General’s report noted that adolescents
youth who are alive in 2024, accounting percent of youth using tobacco products report symptoms of dependence even at
for the projected continued decline in 1 to 2 days per month and 21.2 percent low levels of cigarette smoking, and
smoking prevalence—will die of youth using tobacco products 3 to 5 thus may be particularly vulnerable to
prematurely later in life from a smoking- days per month reported sometimes/ addiction (Ref. 28). FDA expects that
related disease (Ref. 16). As a result of often/always feeling irritable or restless this proposed product standard,
the proposed product standard, many when not using tobacco products for a therefore, would have significant
youth and young adults would not be while, and 15.6 percent of youth using benefits for youth and young adults by
subjected to the impacts of nicotine tobacco products 1 to 2 days per month reducing the risk that those who
addiction from cigarette smoking and and 32.0 percent of youth using tobacco experiment with cigarettes and certain
certain other combusted tobacco products 3 to 5 days per month reported other combusted tobacco products
products (which have a significantly having strong cravings for a tobacco would progress to regular use as a result
stronger effect on youth due, in part, to product during the past 30 days (Ref. of nicotine dependence.
their developing brains, as described in 24). Additionally, other researchers Research studies involving VLNC
sections IV.B and IV.C of this analyzing data from the 2021 NYTS cigarettes—defined previously in this
document), nor would they suffer from found that a sizeable proportion of high document as cigarettes containing up to
the adverse health effects and mortality school students using tobacco products 1.0 mg of nicotine per gram of total
that these products cause. in the past 30 days report symptoms of tobacco—demonstrate that setting the
Nicotine is powerfully addictive, and
nicotine dependence, including 27.2 maximum nicotine level we are
youth and young adults9are
percent reporting a strong craving for proposing here, would lead to a
particularly susceptible to developing a
tobacco use and 19.5 percent reporting reduction in nicotine dependence,
nicotine addiction. Multiple Surgeon
wanting to first use tobacco products which would help people who smoke
General’s Reports on smoking and
within 30 minutes of waking (Refs. 25 cigarettes quit smoking. In studies that
health have noted that almost 90
and 26). While prevalence rates of youth immediately reduced the nicotine
percent of adults who regularly smoke
use of noncombusted tobacco products content of cigarettes by switching
cigarettes initiated smoking by age 18,
(e.g., ENDS) in recent years have participants from usual brand cigarettes
and 98 percent initiated smoking by age
exceeded those of cigarettes and other to LNC or VLNC cigarettes, dependence
26, which is notable given that 25 is the
combusted tobacco products (Refs. 25 decreased in people who smoked
approximate age at which the brain has
and 26), FDA expects that this proposed cigarettes who were not interested in
product standard would have significant quitting compared to those who smoked
9Though age ranges for youth and young adults
benefits for youth by reducing the risk normal nicotine content (NNC) or usual vary across studies, in general, ‘‘youth’’ or
‘‘adolescent’’ encompasses those ages 11–17, while that youth who experiment with brand cigarettes for 6 weeks (Ref. 29), 10
those who are ages 18–25 are considered ‘‘young cigarettes and certain other combusted weeks (Ref. 30), or 12 weeks (Ref. 31).
adults’’ (even though, developmentally, the period tobacco products, or who may consider In smoking cessation studies in which
between 18–20 years of age is often labeled late
using these products as an alternative to participants endorsed wanting to quit,
adolescence); those ages 26 and or older are
considered ‘‘adults’’ (Ref. 17). noncombusted tobacco products, would VLNC cigarettes were also associated
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5040 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
with reductions in nicotine dependence who experiment with cigarettes and Agency, held a 21 CFR part 15 hearing
over time (Refs. 32 to 35). cigars (mainly youth) from moving in early 2018 on the Agency’s approach
FDA is issuing this proposal because beyond experimentation, developing an to evaluating the safety and efficacy of
the tobacco products subject to this addiction to nicotine, and progressing to NRT products, including how they
proposed product standard remain regular use as a result of that addiction. should be used and labeled (82 FR
addictive due to the nicotine yield they Although many factors contribute to 56759 (November 30, 2017)). Also, in
offer users and because combusted an individual’s initial experimentation May 2023, FDA’s Center for Drug
tobacco products are responsible for the with tobacco products, the addictive Evaluation and Research announced the
majority of tobacco-related death and nature of tobacco is the key reason availability of a final guidance for
disease (see section IV.D of this people progress to regular use, and industry entitled ‘‘Smoking Cessation
document for a discussion regarding the scientists agree that it is the presence of and Related Indications: Developing
serious negative health effects of nicotine that causes addiction and Nicotine Replacement Therapy Drug
smoking cigarettes and other combusted sustains a person’s tobacco use (Refs. 1 Products,’’ which provides guidance to
tobacco products). Cigarettes have been HHS at p. 113 and 28). While nicotine assist sponsors in the clinical
precisely designed to create and is the primary addictive chemical in development of NRT drug products,
maintain addiction among people who tobacco, sensorimotor stimuli (e.g., including but not limited to those
smoke. United States v. Philip Morris smell/taste of smoke; airway sensations; intended for smoking cessation and
USA, Inc. et al., 449 F.Supp.2d 1, 307 holding the cigarette) repeatedly occur related chronic conditions (88 FR
(D.D.C. 2006). To protect the public during smoking (Ref. 38). These stimuli 26559, May 1, 2023; see https://
health, particularly youth, FDA is often act as secondary or conditioned www.fda.gov/media/167599/download).
proposing this standard, in part, to reinforcers that contribute to the cycle Additionally, as described further
ensure that people who smoke these of nicotine dependence by motivating below, the Agency is contributing to a
products would be less likely to: (1) and maintaining smoking behavior (Ref. comprehensive effort coordinated by the
initiate regular use; (2) become addicted 38). Once people who use tobacco U.S. Department of Health and Human
to these products; and (3) suffer from become addicted to nicotine, they
Services (HHS or the Department) to
the many diseases and debilitating require nicotine to avoid withdrawal
support tobacco use cessation.
effects, including death, caused by symptoms. In the process of obtaining Rendering cigarettes and certain other
combusted tobacco product use. their nicotine, people who use combusted tobacco products minimally
Similarly, FDA expects that the combusted tobacco products are addictive or nonaddictive through a
proposed product standard would have exposed to an array of toxicants in nicotine product standard would
significant benefits for adults who use tobacco and tobacco smoke that lead to address the principal reason that people
combusted tobacco products, most of a substantially increased risk of who smoke cigarettes have difficulty
whom want to quit but are often morbidity and mortality (Ref. 28).
quitting smoking. If this proposed
unsuccessful because of the highly Because of their nicotine addiction,
product standard is finalized, people
addictive nature of these products (Ref. many people who smoke cigarettes
who use cigarettes and other combusted
13). Data from the 2022 National Health struggle to stop using these toxic
tobacco products covered by this rule
Interview Survey (NHIS) and 2018–2019 tobacco products despite their stated
would be unable to obtain enough
Tobacco Use Supplement to the Current desire to quit (Ref. 28).
nicotine from those products to sustain
Population Survey (TUS–CPS) indicate An advisory report from the World
addiction no matter how they smoked
that 67.7 and 76.6 percent, respectively, Health Organization notes that the
the products (e.g., more frequent
of adults who smoke cigarettes wanted ultimate health benefits of a nicotine
smoking, intensive puffing) (Refs. 32,
to quit (Ref. 36), while 2022 NHIS data reduction strategy, like the one FDA is
40, and 41), facilitating people who
(Ref. 4) and 2018–2019 TUS–CPS data proposing here, would require that the
currently smoke cigarettes to make more
(Ref. 36) show that 53.3 and 51.3 standard cover other combusted tobacco
successful quit attempts.10At the same
percent, respectively, of adults who products—not just cigarettes (Ref. 39).
time, combusted tobacco products at
smoke cigarettes in the United States In alignment with this recommendation
minimally addictive or nonaddictive
actually made a quit attempt within the from the World Health Organization,
levels of nicotine would remain on the
past year. However, analyses of NHIS this proposed rule would cover
market for those who currently smoke
and TUS–CPS data for these years combusted cigarettes and certain other
and would like to continue to do so.
indicate that only 8.8 and 7.5 percent of combusted tobacco products (i.e.,
FDA expects that, if this proposed
adults had successfully quit smoking cigarette tobacco, RYO tobacco, cigars
rule is finalized and a nicotine product
cigarettes, respectively (Refs. 4 and 36). other than premium cigars, pipe
standard for cigarettes and certain other
Adults who smoke cigarettes may make tobacco). The World Health
combusted tobacco products is in place,
30 or more quit attempts before Organization report also noted that such
many people who smoke cigarettes will
succeeding (Ref. 37). FDA expects that a strategy should be accompanied by the
either quit all tobacco-product use or
decreasing the nicotine yield of provision of cessation treatments to help
switch to a noncombusted tobacco
cigarettes and certain other combusted people quit, including behavioral
product. Those who switch completely
tobacco products covered by this rule, support and nicotine replacement
to use of a noncombusted tobacco
by reducing nicotine content, so that therapy (NRT) or other medications
product may sustain their nicotine
they are minimally addictive or (Ref. 39). FDA remains committed to
dependence but may significantly
nonaddictive would likely help people facilitating the development and use of
who smoke reduce their dependence on therapeutic nicotine products for
combusted tobacco products, thereby tobacco product cessation and increased 10As stated throughout this preamble, in the
event that a nicotine product standard addresses
making it easier for them to quit availability of services alongside only cigarettes, FDA expects that, to maintain their
smoking. As discussed throughout this enhanced outreach efforts to support nicotine dependence, some number of people who
document, FDA also expects that tobacco use cessation. For example, are addicted to cigarettes would likely migrate to
decreasing the nicotine content in these FDA’s Nicotine Steering Committee, other similar combusted tobacco products (or
engage in dual use with such products) after the
products, and thus the nicotine yield which helps to develop and implement
product standard goes into effect, reducing the
offered to users, would prevent people nicotine policy and regulation for the benefits of the standard.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5041
reduce their risk of tobacco-related strengthen performance measurement entirely. Specifically, the model
death and disease because switching and evaluation; and (6) promote ongoing assumes that the risk for people who
completely to a noncombusted tobacco and innovative research to support and switch to noncombusted product use is
product would reduce exposure to the accelerate smoking cessation (https:// 8 percent higher than the risk for those
chemical constituents created through www.hhs.gov/about/news/2024/03/08/ who quit tobacco use entirely. Details of
combustion, which are the primary hhs-announces-new-smoking-cessation- this approach can be found in the FDA’s
contributors of tobacco-related harm framework-support-quitting.html). With modeling document (Ref. 42). In
(Ref. 8). increased availability and accessibility addition, the model estimates that, by
The benefits of this rule have been of services, more people who smoke the year 2060, in the United States, this
determined without taking into may be motivated to take advantage of proposed product standard would result
consideration the impact of any cessation resources, whether they smoke in 1.8 million tobacco-related deaths
smoking cessation services that may be cigarettes or other combusted tobacco averted, rising to 4.3 million deaths
coordinated by HHS, and are expected products. Additionally, FDA has averted by the end of the century (Ref.
to be significant. Also, FDA expects that numerous processes and tools at its 42). The reduction in premature deaths
unassisted cessation attempts, i.e., those disposal to communicate directly with attributable to the proposed product
made by people who smoke without consumers, including communities that standard would result in 19.6 million
help, may be more successful in an are underserved by cessation services life years gained by 2060 and 76.4
environment in which the product being and/or are disproportionately impacted million life years gained by 2100 (see
quit is no longer addictive as compared by tobacco use, and will continue to section VIII.A of this document for
to historic quitting success rates where evaluate the need for additional public further discussion of the model) (Ref.
it has been easy to relapse to the same outreach, including targeted education 42).
highly addictive product. Nevertheless, initiatives, in support of this proposed
FDA recognizes that increasing and rule. However, the Agency does not B. Relevant Regulatory History
improving cessation resources, have evidence to suggest that such an In its implementation of the Family
particularly in communities where effort is necessary at this time in order Smoking Prevention and Tobacco
access to cessation resources have been to experience the public health benefits Control Act (Tobacco Control Act) (Pub.
historically lacking, may provide an of this proposed product standard. L. 111–31) since its passage in 2009,
opportunity to further increase the FDA has engaged in close study and
For the reasons stated here and
expected benefits of this proposed careful consideration of the scientific
throughout this document, FDA is
product standard and to enhance the evidence and complex policy issues
proposing this tobacco product standard
degree to which such benefits are related to nicotine in cigarettes and
to: (1) reduce the risk of progression to
experienced by people in populations other combusted tobacco products. FDA
regular use and nicotine dependence for
that are disproportionately impacted by issued an ANPRM to solicit data and
those who experiment with such
combusted tobacco use. Accordingly, information for consideration in
tobacco products, especially youth and
FDA is contributing to a comprehensive developing a tobacco product standard
(2) make it easier for people who are
effort being coordinated by HHS to to regulate nicotine yield by setting the
addicted to cigarettes and certain other
support and accelerate cessation of maximum nicotine level for cigarettes,
combusted tobacco products and who
combusted tobacco products.11With conducted a robust scientific assessment
are interested in quitting to quit by
input from subject matter experts from related to a nicotine product standard
reducing the nicotine in these products
across HHS Operating Divisions, the for combusted tobacco products,
to minimally addictive or nonaddictive
Department has finalized the ‘‘HHS developed a population health model to
levels. FDA expects that this proposed
Framework To Support and Accelerate assess the potential public health
product standard would significantly
Smoking Cessation’’ (Framework). The impacts of such a product standard, and
reduce the morbidity and mortality
Framework aims to accelerate smoking
sponsored research on a variety of
cessation and reduce smoking-related caused by smoking. Based on FDA’s
nicotine-related topics through contracts
disparities by building on current population health model, by the year
and interagency agreements with
activities and collaborations across the 2100, in the United States,
Federal partners, including the National
Department. The Framework vision is to approximately 48 million youth and
Institutes of Health (NIH).12FDA has
ensure that every person in America has young adults who would have otherwise
considered the comments and
access to comprehensive, evidence- initiated smoking would not start as a
information received in response to the
based cessation treatment and can result of the proposed product standard.
ANPRM, scientific assessment, and
benefit from HHS cessation supports, The model also projects that more than
population health model in developing
programs, and policies. Specific 12.9 million additional people who
this proposed rule. Please see the
Framework goals are to: (1) reduce smoke cigarettes would quit smoking
remainder of this section for further
smoking and cessation-related (including those who switch to
discussion.
disparities; (2) increase awareness and noncombusted tobacco products) 1 year
knowledge related to smoking and after implementation of the proposed 1. ANPRM
cessation; (3) strengthen, expand, and product standard, increasing to 19.5 In July 2017, FDA announced a
sustain cessation services and supports; million additional people who formerly comprehensive approach to tobacco and
(4) increase access to and coverage of smoked cigarettes within 5 years of
nicotine regulation to protect youth and
comprehensive, evidence-based implementation. Section XII discusses
reduce tobacco-related disease and
cessation treatment; (5) advance, that the main quantified benefits come
death (Ref. 43). As part of the public
expand, and sustain surveillance and from averted mortality and morbidity, as
dialogue on the comprehensive
a result of tobacco use transitions,
approach, in March 2018, FDA issued
11See, for e.g., https://www.fda.gov/tobacco- including switching. In terms of three ANPRMs related to the regulation
products/ctp-newsroom/fda-and-nih-joint-public- mortality benefits, the model considers
meeting-advancing-smoking-cessation-priorities- a higher risk for people who switch to
registration-open?utm_campaign=ctp-research& 12Information on specific projects supported by
utm_content=landingpage&utm_medium=email& noncombusted products compared to FDA is available at https://www.fda.gov/tobacco-
utm_source=govdelivery&utm_term=stratcomms. those who quit tobacco product use products/tobacco-science-research/research.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5042 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
of nicotine in combusted cigarettes (83 people seeking to add nicotine in liquid smokeless, ENDS) to prevent migration
FR 11818), flavors (including menthol) or other form to their combusted to such products, particularly among
in tobacco products (83 FR 12294, tobacco product; and whether illicit youth; a significant number of
March 21, 2018) (Flavors ANPRM), and trade could occur as a result of a comments urged FDA to extend the
premium cigars (83 FR 12901, March 26, nicotine product standard and how that scope of a nicotine product standard to
2018). In addition, FDA announced the could impact public health. Finally, combusted tobacco products other than
availability of a draft concept paper FDA also sought comments, data, cigarettes. Citing national survey data
entitled ‘‘Illicit Trade in Tobacco research results, and other information trends and various recent studies,
Products After Implementation of a regarding economic impacts of a numerous comments—including those
Food and Drug Administration Product potential nicotine tobacco product from public health associations,
Standard,’’ and sought public comment standard. government agencies, and advocacy
(83 FR 11754, March 16, 2018). This FDA received over 7,700 comments groups—asserted that including all
paper analyzes the potential for illicit on the Nicotine ANPRM, with combusted tobacco products, not only
trade markets to develop in response to approximately 6,700 of those comments cigarettes, would prevent potential
a tobacco product standard (Ref. 44). submitted as part of 20 different youth initiation of, migration to, and
The Nicotine ANPRM requested data organized campaigns. The key ANPRM dual use with other combusted products
and information for consideration in areas of comments are covered in the with higher nicotine content that may
developing a tobacco product standard relevant sections in this document and be harmful to health, thus aligning with
to set a maximum nicotine level for include the possible scope of products the public health goals of a nicotine
cigarettes to make them minimally covered by the rule (section IX.C), product standard. Additionally, citing
addictive or nonaddictive. Specifically, technical achievability (section VII.E), studies relating to tobacco use patterns
FDA sought comments, evidence, and illicit trade (section IX.D), and by young people, a joint submission
other information regarding whether a implementation/effective date (section from several nicotine and tobacco
potential tobacco product standard XI). Some of the issues raised in the researchers stated that adolescents who
comments to the ANPRM are
should cover tobacco products other use tobacco are particularly prone to
highlighted below.
than cigarettes (e.g., cigarette tobacco, dual and multiple tobacco product use;
Comments generally in support of
RYO tobacco, some or all cigars, pipe therefore, the potential for adolescents
setting a maximum nicotine level in
tobacco, waterpipe tobacco); what to shift to other nicotine-containing
cigarettes stated that a nicotine product
maximum level of nicotine would be tobacco products underscores the need
standard would be appropriate for the
appropriate for the protection of the for a nicotine reduction policy to cover
protection of the public health. In
public health, in light of scientific all combusted tobacco products. The
particular, many comments argued that
evidence about the addictive properties joint submission comment further stated
reducing the nicotine content in
of nicotine in cigarettes; whether such a that if the scope of a nicotine product
cigarettes to minimally addictive or
standard should propose either a single standard only covered combusted
nonaddictive levels would be
target (i.e., an immediate reduction, cigarettes, there is evidence from adult
appropriate for the following reasons:
where the nicotine is reduced all at (1) reduced nicotine content in studies that cigars—and in particular
once) or a stepped-down approach (i.e., cigarettes will contribute to smoking little cigars—would be an attractive
a gradual reduction, where the nicotine cessation, as well as decreased initiation substitute for full nicotine content
is reduced gradually over time) to reach and addiction by people newly using combusted cigarettes. These researchers
the desired maximum nicotine level; cigarettes and certain other combusted noted, if the scope of a proposed
whether such a product standard should tobacco products and youth and (2) nicotine product standard included
specify a method for manufacturers to such increased cessation and decreased combusted cigarettes and other
use to detect the level of nicotine in initiation will reduce the instances of combusted products, it would increase
their products; the technical feasibility preventable deaths and other negative the likelihood that people who use
of current as well as more recent, novel health effects caused by smoking. Some combusted cigarettes, including youth
nicotine reduction techniques; and the comments also urged FDA to issue a and young adults, who migrate to other
proper timeframe for implementation of nicotine product standard as part of a nicotine-containing products (rather
a possible nicotine tobacco product comprehensive package of tobacco than quit), would transition to
standard to allow adequate time for regulatory measures, including noncombusted products, thereby
industry to comply. The Nicotine increasing consumer access to reduced increasing the health benefits of the
ANPRM also requested comment on risk products, regulating flavors in policy.
possible negative effects that could tobacco products, taking action as soon FDA also received comments from
diminish the population health benefits as possible, fully reviewing premarket individuals, advocacy groups, and
expected as a result of a nicotine applications for new tobacco products, members of the tobacco industry
product standard, such as continued and making effective smoking cessation generally opposing efforts to reduce
combusted tobacco product use, where treatments and ongoing cessation nicotine levels in cigarettes to
people who currently use tobacco support accessible and affordable to minimally addictive or nonaddictive
products subject to a nicotine tobacco people who smoke cigarettes. levels. These comments generally stated
product standard could turn to other FDA received many comments that such a regulation would stifle free
combusted tobacco products to maintain expressing concern about the effect of enterprise or would negatively limit
their nicotine dependence, both in nicotine on the adolescent brain and its consumer freedom of choice and that
combination with cigarettes (i.e., dual role in addicting those who experiment the regulation would result in a de facto
use) or in place of cigarettes (i.e., with tobacco products, particularly ban on cigarettes that would have a
switching); the potential for increased youth and young adults, leading them to devastating impact on tobacco farming,
harm due to continued VLNC cigarette progress to regular use. Some comments as well as the manufacturing,
smoking with altered smoking behaviors recommended extending the scope of a distribution, and retail sectors. Some
(e.g., increase in number of cigarettes nicotine product standard to comments discussed the technical
smoked, increased depth of inhalation); noncombusted tobacco products (e.g., feasibility of achieving lower nicotine
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5043
levels. Some comments opposed to a compensatory smoking. The review also on Tobacco Use, Morbidity, and
nicotine product standard stated that determined that if FDA were to establish Mortality in the U.S.’’ (Ref. 42), we
there is not enough scientific research to a nicotine product standard that covered estimated the potential impacts of a
support reducing nicotine in cigarettes. only cigarettes, a portion of people who nicotine product standard by modeling
Other comments argued that FDA are currently addicted to cigarettes a baseline scenario of use of cigarettes
should instead focus on giving adults would likely migrate to other, similar and noncombusted tobacco products
who smoke cigarettes access to a wider combusted tobacco products to maintain including smokeless tobacco, e-
choice of less harmful tobacco products their nicotine dependence (or engage in cigarettes, and HTPs. These product
and truthful information about the dual use without substantially reducing classes (cigarettes and noncombusted
benefits of switching to those products, their combusted tobacco product use), products) were selected because of the
as well as focus resources on a plan to thereby reducing the positive public magnitude of population health effects
reduce harm through proven strategies health impact of such a rule. Based on from cigarette smoking and the
to prevent initiation and encourage FDA’s review of the literature on likelihood of product switching to
cessation. combusted tobacco products, including noncombusted products, especially e-
FDA has reviewed and closely cigarettes, cigarette tobacco, RYO cigarettes. Estimates of changes in
considered the comments to the tobacco, cigars, and pipe tobacco, the mortality from other exposures
Nicotine ANPRM, as well as additional final scientific assessment concluded including non-premium cigar and pipe
evidence and information not available that use of any of these combusted tobacco use are not produced directly by
at the time of the Nicotine ANPRM, in products is sufficient to create or sustain the model but are derived from model
developing this proposed rule. nicotine dependence and would outputs instead. We then compared the
2. Scientific Review therefore continue to expose people baseline scenario to a product standard
who use these products to toxicants. scenario characterized by the
As the body of evidence has
Further, FDA’s scientific assessment introduction of a potential nicotine
continued to grow, FDA undertook a
concluded that the establishment of a product standard that would apply to
robust systematic review of the
maximum nicotine level in combusted cigarettes, cigarette tobacco, RYO
scientific evidence regarding the likely
tobacco products that would render tobacco, non-premium cigars, and pipe
effects of reducing nicotine in
them minimally addictive or tobacco. FDA’s modeling framework
combusted tobacco products. This
nonaddictive could increase the and methodological approach and the
review, entitled ‘‘The Science of a
likelihood of successful quit attempts associated data inputs and assumptions
Nicotine Standard for Combusted
and help prevent people who have been peer reviewed by
Tobacco Products’’ (Ref. 45), covers
experiment with cigarettes and cigars independent external experts. Taking
peer-reviewed, publicly available
(mainly youth) from progressing to into consideration comments from this
literature and focuses on the likely
regular use, thereby significantly peer review (Ref. 49), FDA revised the
effects of reducing nicotine in
reducing the morbidity and mortality modeling document, and the final
combusted tobacco products. This
caused by smoking. FDA has considered modeling document is available in the
scientific assessment has been peer
the scientific assessment conclusions in docket for this proposed product
reviewed by independent external
the development of this proposed standard (Ref. 42). FDA’s modeling
experts. Taking into consideration
product standard. work informed the development of this
comments from this peer review (Ref.
proposed product standard.
46), FDA revised the scientific In addition, to assess the potential
Additionally, the modeling document,
assessment, and the final peer-reviewed public health impacts of a nicotine
model code, and inputs are publicly
document is available in the docket for product standard, FDA developed a
available at https://www.fda.gov/
this proposed rule (Ref. 45). population health model using inputs
science-research/peer-review-scientific-
Additionally, this final peer-reviewed derived from available empirical
information-and-assessments/
document and other related documents evidence and expert opinion to estimate
completed-peer-reviews. Further
such as FDA’s response to the peer the impact of changes in tobacco
discussion of FDA’s estimates of the
review comments can be found at product initiation, cessation, switching,
public health impact of this proposed
https://www.fda.gov/science-research/ and dual use on tobacco use prevalence,
product standard can be found in
peer-review-scientific-information-and- morbidity, and mortality in the United
section VIII of this document.
assessments/completed-peer-reviews. States. Details of this modeling
FDA’s peer reviewed scientific approach have been previously 3. Premium Cigars
assessment examined the effects of published in two peer-reviewed
On August 9, 2023, the U.S. District
reducing the level of nicotine in publications (Refs. 47 and 48), which
Court for the District of Columbia issued
combusted tobacco products on use describe the overall model in terms of
an order vacating FDA’s rule deeming
behavior, dependence, and toxicant the inputs, transition behaviors, and
tobacco products to be subject to FDA’s
exposure, as well as the knowledge, outputs that it contains, along with
tobacco product authorities ‘‘insofar as
beliefs, and perceptions around nicotine results from simulation studies. In
it applies to premium cigars.’’13Cigar
and VLNC cigarettes. This scientific preparation for this proposed product
review found that the totality of the standard, FDA updated a previously-
13For purposes of its ruling, the court specified
evidence supports that extended published model (Ref. 47), which
that a premium cigar is a cigar that: (1) is wrapped
exposure to combusted cigarettes describes the impact of a potential in whole tobacco leaf; (2) contains a 100 percent
containing VLNC tobacco filler is product standard that limits the level of leaf tobacco binder; (3) contains at least 50 percent
associated with reduced addiction nicotine in cigarettes, RYO tobacco, (of the filler by weight) long filler tobacco (i.e.,
whole tobacco leaves that run the length of the
potential, dependence levels, and non-premium cigars, and pipe tobacco cigar); (4) is handmade or hand rolled (i.e., no
number of cigarettes smoked per day, so that they are minimally addictive or machinery was used apart from simple tools, such
and increased quit attempts among nonaddictive. In this updated modeling as scissors to cut the tobacco prior to rolling); (5)
people who currently smoke cigarettes, document, entitled ‘‘Methodological has no filter, nontobacco tip, or nontobacco
mouthpiece; (6) does not have a characterizing
without evidence of increased toxicant Approach to Modeling the Potential
flavor other than tobacco; (7) contains only tobacco,
exposure, craving, withdrawal, or Impact of a Nicotine Product Standard Continued
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5044 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Ass’n of Am. v. FDA, No. 16–cv–01460, and nonusers of tobacco products, of the be appropriate for the protection of the
2023 WL 5094869 (D.D.C. Aug. 9, 2023), proposed standard; public health. The finding as to whether
appeal docketed, No. 23–5220 (D.C. Cir. • The increased or decreased a regulation is appropriate for the
argued Sept. 13, 2024). The government likelihood that existing users of tobacco protection of the public health must be
has appealed this decision. When the products will stop using such products; determined with respect to the risks and
deemed status of premium cigars is and benefits to the population as a whole,
resolved, FDA will consider any • The increased or decreased including users and nonusers of the
impacts with respect to this proposed likelihood that those who do not use tobacco products, and must take into
rule and take additional steps as tobacco products will start using such account:
warranted, including for example, by products. • The increased or decreased
reopening the comment period and/or 2. Authority To Establish a Maximum likelihood that existing users of tobacco
issuing a supplemental notice of Nicotine Level and Related Provisions products will stop using such products;
proposed rulemaking. References to and
premium cigars in this document serve Section 907 of the FD&C Act • The increased or decreased
merely to clarify the current proposed authorizes FDA to adopt tobacco likelihood that those who do not use
scope of products covered, evaluate the product standards that are appropriate tobacco products will start using such
for the protection of the public health, products (see section 906(d)(1) of the
scientific evidence related to non-
including expressly authorizing FDA to FD&C Act).
premium cigars, and describe FDA’s
adopt product standards with Under these authorities and section
approach to modeling the projected
provisions for nicotine yields; for the 701 of the FD&C Act, which provides
public health impacts of this proposed
reduction or elimination of other FDA with the authority to promulgate
standard.
constituents (including smoke regulations for the efficient enforcement
C. Legal Authority constituents) or harmful components; of the FD&C Act, FDA is proposing
and respecting the construction, provisions that would restrict the
1. Product Standard Authority
components, ingredients, additives, manufacture, sale, and distribution of
The Tobacco Control Act was enacted constituents (including smoke cigarettes and certain other combusted
on June 22, 2009, amending the FD&C constituents), and properties of tobacco tobacco products that are not in
Act and providing FDA with the products (section 907(a)(3), (a)(4)(A)(i) compliance with this standard. These
authority to regulate tobacco products. to (iii), and (a)(4)(B)(i)). This includes provisions are not intended to restrict
Section 901 of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. the authority to issue a new product the manufacture of cigarettes intended
387a) granted FDA the authority to standard to establish a maximum level for export. Consistent with section
regulate the manufacture, marketing, of nicotine in tobacco products. 801(e)(1) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C.
and distribution of cigarettes, cigarette FDA is proposing to limit nicotine 381(e)(1)), a tobacco product intended
tobacco, RYO tobacco, and smokeless yield by setting a maximum nicotine for export shall not be deemed to be in
tobacco to protect the public health and content level for finished cigarettes and violation of section 907 of the FD&C Act
to reduce tobacco use by youth. The certain other finished combusted or this product standard, if it meets the
Tobacco Control Act also gave the tobacco products not to exceed 0.70 mg criteria enumerated in section 801(e)(1)
Agency authority to conduct rulemaking of nicotine per gram of total tobacco. of the FD&C Act, including not being
to ‘‘deem’’ any other tobacco products FDA is not seeking to require the sold or offered for sale in domestic
subject to chapter IX of the FD&C Act reduction of nicotine yields in any commerce. These provisions are critical
(21 U.S.C. 387 to 387t). In 2016, FDA tobacco product to zero, which is to maintain the purpose of the standard
issued a final rule deeming products prohibited under section 907(d)(3) of by helping to ensure that the tobacco
meeting the statutory definition of the FD&C Act. To ensure that tobacco products conform to the proposed
‘‘tobacco product’’ (including cigars and products subject to the product standard maximum nicotine level when used by
pipe tobacco), except accessories of the comply with the proposed maximum consumers.
newly deemed products, to be subject to nicotine level, FDA also is including FDA is also proposing, under these
chapter IX of the FD&C Act, as amended provisions that would require authorities and others described herein
by the Tobacco Control Act (81 FR manufacturers to test their products regarding testing and recordkeeping, a
28974) (deeming final rule). using an analytical test method for requirement that the labels of tobacco
Among the tobacco product conformance with the maximum products covered under this proposed
authorities provided to FDA is the nicotine level pursuant to section product standard contain a
authority to adopt tobacco product 907(a)(4)(B)(ii) and (iv) of the FD&C Act. manufacturing code to identify, among
standards where FDA determines that other things, the date of manufacture of
3. Sale and Distribution Restrictions
such standard is appropriate for the a production batch, so that FDA can
protection of the public health (section Section 907(a)(4)(B)(v) of the FD&C determine whether a product on store
907(a)(3)(A) of the FD&C Act). To Act states that product standards shall, shelves is in conformance with the
establish a tobacco product standard, where appropriate for the protection of proposed product standard. The
section 907(a)(3)(A) and (B) of the FD&C the public health, include provisions proposed manufacturing code would
Act requires that FDA find that the requiring that the sale and distribution allow manufacturers and FDA to
standard is appropriate for the of tobacco products be restricted but identify the production batch of a
protection of the public health, taking only to the extent that the sale and particular finished product that has
into consideration scientific evidence distribution of a tobacco product may be been released for distribution. This
concerning: restricted under section 906(d) of the information is intended to help
• The risks and benefits to the FD&C Act. Similar to section 907, determine the product’s history (e.g.,
section 906(d) of the FD&C Act gives batch production records) and assist population as a whole, including users
FDA authority to require restrictions on manufacturers and FDA in the event of
the sale and distribution of tobacco a nonconforming tobacco product
water, and vegetable gum with no other ingredients
products by regulation if the Agency investigation and any corrective actions
or additives; and (8) weighs more than 6 pounds per
1,000 units. determines that such regulation would to be taken by a manufacturer as a result
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5045
of the investigation. The manufacturing to use an analytical test method and to tobacco products that have been
code must also contain an ‘‘-NS’’ demonstrate that the test method was released for distribution. The
designation. The ‘‘-NS’’ designation will validated in an analytical test maintenance of these records for the
enable retailers to readily identify that laboratory. Proposed §1160.16 would time period specified in this proposed
a finished tobacco product conforms require that manufacturers design and product standard is necessary to help
with this standard. Finished tobacco implement a sampling plan for finished ensure that such tobacco products are in
products that do not have this cigarettes and certain other finished conformance with the proposed product
designation do not conform to this combusted tobacco products to ensure standard and are not adulterated or
standard. The manufacturing code the batch consistently conforms to the misbranded, consistent with the
information also would aid FDA in proposed maximum nicotine level. authority provided in section 909 of the
ensuring compliance with this proposed To support these proposed FD&C Act. FDA has authority to inspect
product standard by clearly identifying requirements, proposed §1160.18(b) manufacturers, including access to these
those products that conform to the would require each tobacco product records, under, among other authorities,
standard and linking those products to manufacturer to investigate all potential section 704 of the FD&C Act. In
records that substantiate their nonconforming tobacco products to addition, the recordkeeping and record
conformance. determine if the product is access requirements would help FDA
nonconforming. For example, if any with the efficient enforcement of the
4. Testing Requirements
representative samples from a batch of Act, consistent with the rulemaking
This proposal contains provisions finished cigarettes or certain other authority provided by section 701(a) of
regarding testing requirements pursuant finished combusted tobacco products the FD&C Act.
to sections 907(a)(4)(A)(iii) and are determined to be out of conformance
IV. Nicotine in Cigarettes and Other
907(a)(4)(B) of the FD&C Act to help or if FDA notifies a tobacco product
Combusted Tobacco Products:
ensure that finished cigarettes and manufacturer that a finished tobacco
Addiction, Initiation, Dependence,
certain other finished combusted product in commercial distribution does
Cessation, Relapse, Health Effects, and
tobacco products conform to the not conform to the requirements of this
Consumer Perceptions
requirements of the proposed product part, the manufacturer must conduct an
standard before they are distributed to investigation to determine the extent of Tobacco products are addictive,
consumers. the nonconformity and locations to primarily due to the presence of
Section 907(a)(4)(A)(iii) states that which nonconforming tobacco products nicotine, and the magnitude of public
product standards shall include have been distributed. This proposed health harm caused by tobacco products
provisions that are appropriate for the requirement would ensure that any is inextricably linked to their addictive
protection of the public health, reports of nonconforming products, nature (Ref. 50 at p. xi). Some evidence
including provisions, where whether as a result of manufacturer suggests that nicotine is more addictive
appropriate, relating to any requirement testing or otherwise, are examined and than many other addictive substances.
under section 907(a)(4)(B) of the FD&C investigated and that appropriate For example, one study showed the
Act. Section 907(a)(4)(B)(ii) of the FD&C measures are taken to ensure that probability of transitioning from first
Act, in turn, provides that a product nonconforming products are not use to dependence was 68 percent for
standard shall, where appropriate for distributed to consumers and to prevent nicotine, but less than 23 percent for
the protection of the public health, future nonconformity. alcohol, cocaine, and cannabis (Ref. 51).
include provisions for testing the While cigarettes are the most widely
5. Recordkeeping
tobacco product. In addition, section used tobacco products among adults,
907(a)(4)(B)(iv) of the FD&C Act Section 909 of the FD&C Act other combusted tobacco products that
provides that, where appropriate for the authorizes FDA to require tobacco are possible targets of product migration
protection of the public health, a product manufacturers to establish and (i.e., alternatives that allow people who
product standard shall include maintain records, make reports, and smoke cigarettes to maintain their
provisions requiring that the results of provide such information as the Agency nicotine addiction) or dual use have
test(s) required under section may by regulation reasonably require to similar adverse health effects, and also
907(a)(4)(B)(ii) show that the product is assure that a tobacco product is not cause nicotine dependence (Refs. 52 and
in conformity with the portions of the adulterated or misbranded and to 53). For example, persons who use
standard for which the test(s) were otherwise protect public health. cigars and pipe tobacco are still subject
required. FDA is proposing testing FDA is proposing a requirement that to the addictive effects of nicotine
requirements because it finds that such manufacturers maintain certain records, through nicotine absorption (and to the
requirements are appropriate for the including the results of batch testing health impacts of long-term use that
protection of the public health. and analyses conducted to determine may follow from regular use due to
Consistent with these statutory conformance with the proposed product addiction) even if they report that they
provisions, proposed §§1160.12, standard, records of sampling plans and do not inhale (Refs. 54 to 56).
1160.14, and 1160.16 would establish sampling procedures, records related to
A. Nicotine Is Addictive
product testing and sampling plan manufacturing controls, and all records
requirements. Proposed §1160.12 related to the analytical test method The scientific evidence is clear that
would require that a manufacturer used to assess finished cigarettes and nicotine is the primary chemical in
conduct testing on each batch of certain other finished combusted tobacco products that causes addiction
finished cigarettes and certain other tobacco products for conformance with through its psychoactive and reinforcing
finished combusted tobacco products to the proposed maximum nicotine level effects (Ref. 57). Since 1988, the U.S.
determine whether the products requirement. FDA is also proposing to Surgeon General has determined that
conform to the proposed maximum require that manufacturers use a there is a causal relationship between
nicotine level requirement and would manufacturing code, from which the smoking and addiction to nicotine (Refs.
also require the manufacturer to Agency must be able to identify the 1 and 57), and the earlier that
document all testing. Proposed production batch of finished cigarettes individuals begin smoking, the less
§1160.14 would require manufacturers and certain other finished combusted likely they are to successfully quit (Ref.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5046 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
27). Upon inhaling smoke from a behavior. Currently, most marketed time course are consistent with most
burning cigarette, nicotine is absorbed cigarettes are above that threshold; prototypical addictive substances (e.g.,
into the lungs and rapidly travels to the people who smoke cigarettes develop alcohol, benzodiazepines, opioids,
brain. Once in the brain, nicotine and maintain their addiction through amphetamines, cocaine, caffeine) (Ref.
produces its initial effects by binding to continued smoking (Refs. 17 and 63). 74). While some have asserted that
nicotinic receptors—the primary targets Evidence supports that VLNC cigarettes people smoke cigarettes as a ‘‘tool’’ or
for nicotine in the brain—and inducing (see table 1 of this document) are below ‘‘resource’’ that provides them with
release of the chemical dopamine (Refs. that threshold, as studies show a
needed ‘‘psychological benefits,’’ such
58 and 59). Dopamine plays a major role reduction in the level of addiction based
as increased mental alertness and
in the pleasurable and reinforcing on dependence scales (Ref. 32) and
anxiety reduction (Ref. 75), this view is
effects of smoking that promote cigarettes per day (CPD) (Refs. 32, 64,
not borne out by the scientific evidence.
continued use (Refs. 58 and 59). and 65). The maximum nicotine level
In fact, the claimed ‘‘psychological
Nicotine addiction occurs as the result included in this proposed product
benefits’’ (i.e., increased mental
of repeated exposure to nicotine, which standard is based on FDA’s analysis of
alertness, anxiety reduction, coping
induces changes in the brain (Refs. 58 studies regarding the likely effects of
to 60). Addiction to nicotine can lead to reducing nicotine, which demonstrates with stress) that have been ascribed to
symptoms of nicotine dependence, that extended exposure to VLNC a smoking ‘‘habit’’ are actually
which may include tolerance to the cigarettes, which result in very low symptoms of withdrawal suppression
effects of nicotine, withdrawal nicotine yield that cannot be overcome (Ref. 76). Craving or urge is described as
symptoms upon cessation of use, and by use behaviors, is associated with a motivation for substance use, which is
craving cigarettes (Refs. 1 and 58). reduced addiction potential, seen in people who use nicotine (Refs.
The addiction potential of a nicotine dependence levels, number of cigarettes 77 to 79). Although craving is often
delivery system varies as a function of smoked per day, and increased quit characterized as a symptom of nicotine
its total nicotine dosing capability, the attempts among people who currently and tobacco withdrawal, it is also a
speed at which it can deliver nicotine, smoke cigarettes, without evidence of prominent symptom of nicotine
the rate of absorption, its palatability increased toxicant exposure, craving, dependence (Ref. 72), and it can occur
and sensory characteristics, how easy it withdrawal, or compensatory smoking in the absence of other withdrawal
is for the person using the product to (Ref. 45).
symptoms.
extract nicotine, and its cost (Ref. 61).
2. Tolerance
The amount of nicotine delivered and 4. Nicotine Use Is an Addiction, Not a
the means through which it is delivered Tolerance is defined as a state in Habit
can either reduce or enhance a product’s which, after repeated exposure, a
potential for abuse and physiological substance produces less of an effect than A few individual reports have
effects (Ref. 28 at p.113). Quicker previously (Ref. 66) and increasing challenged the conclusion that nicotine
delivery, higher rate of absorption, and amounts are required to achieve the is the constituent in tobacco products
higher resulting concentration of effect observed with the first exposure. that causes addiction, stating that
nicotine increase the potential for Both clinical and preclinical research nicotine only causes habitual behavior
addiction (Ref. 28 at p.113). A cigarette has shown that nicotine has euphoric (Refs. 67 and 75), and that the craving
is an inexpensive and extremely effects, produces a ‘‘pleasurable buzz,’’ associated with nicotine is determined
effective nicotine delivery system that and directly enhances positive affect or by nonpharmacological factors that are
maximizes the cigarette’s addicting and indirectly increases the reward value of disassociated from smoking withdrawal
toxic effects (Ref. 61). pleasurable situations (Refs. 67 to 70). (Ref. 80). However, nicotine has been
Tobacco use disorder is a psychiatric With repeated exposure to nicotine,
extensively studied and the evidence
disorder, defined by the Diagnostic and neuroadaptation occurs to some of these
overwhelmingly demonstrates that
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders positive effects, and symptoms of
nicotine is an addictive drug and the
(DSM) as being characterized by craving and withdrawal begin during
fundamental reason that individuals
tolerance to the effects of tobacco periods of abstinence (Ref. 58). Nicotine
continue using tobacco products (Refs.
products, withdrawal symptoms that are addiction results from a combination of
57 and 28). Since 1988, the U.S.
mitigated by the self-administration of positive reinforcement from smoking
Surgeon General has concluded that
nicotine-containing products, and and avoidance of these withdrawal
nicotine is the substance in tobacco
unsuccessful attempts at reducing or symptoms (Ref. 58). Evidence of
quitting the use of nicotine-containing tolerance in people who smoke products that causes addiction through
products (Ref. 62). Researchers consider cigarettes is demonstrated as they tend its psychoactive effects, reinforcing
several behaviors indicative of a to progressively increase the number of effects, tolerance, and physical
substance with addictive properties. cigarettes they smoke over a period of dependence/withdrawal, and that
These behaviors include reinforcement, several years before plateauing to a nicotine use is not habitual (Ref. 57).
tolerance, withdrawal, and craving—all relatively constant level of use (Ref. 71). The tobacco industry also has
of which support the fact that nicotine acknowledged that nicotine is addictive
3. Withdrawal and Craving
is the primary addictive constituent in (Refs. 81 and 82).
tobacco products. The scientific Nicotine produces a characteristic
For these reasons, FDA concludes that
evidence is clear that nicotine is the withdrawal syndrome manifested by
the addictiveness of nicotine in tobacco
primary chemical in tobacco products irritability/anger/frustration, anxiety,
products leads to regular use (even
that causes and maintains addiction. depressed mood, difficulty
when people wish to quit), which is at
concentrating, increased appetite,
1. Reinforcement the root of tobacco-related disease and
insomnia, and restlessness (Ref. 72).
The reinforcement threshold for Symptoms typically emerge within the death from cigarettes and certain other
nicotine can be defined as the lowest first 1–2 days following abstinence, combusted tobacco products.
nicotine level that would maintain or peak within the first week, and last 2–
increase nicotine self-administration 4 weeks (Ref. 73). The symptoms and
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5047
B. The Developing Brain’s Vulnerability as few as 100 cigarettes (Ref. 17). of first inhaling from a cigarette, and
to the Effects of Nicotine Leads to Longitudinal and nationally half had done so by the time they were
Progression to Regular Cigarette Use representative cross-sectional data smoking seven cigarettes per month
Among Youth and Young Adults Who indicate that an established pattern of (Ref. 93).
Experiment cigarette use—including those who Similarly, researchers have found that
‘‘rapidly escalate’’ to regular use— among the 3.9 million middle and high
Youth and young adults are
typically occurs by early adulthood school students who reported current
particularly susceptible to developing
(ages 20–22) (Refs. 87 and 88). The use of tobacco products (including
an addiction to nicotine. Due to the
Centers for Disease Control and cigarettes and cigars) in 2012, 2 million
brain’s ongoing development during
Prevention (CDC) and other researchers of those students—including those who
adolescence and young adulthood—
have estimated that 30 percent or more used intermittently (e.g., smoking
until about age 25—it is more
of people who experiment with cigarettes on a monthly basis)—reported
vulnerable to nicotine’s effects than the
cigarettes transition to regular cigarette at least one symptom of dependence
adult brain is (Refs. 83 to 85). The 1994,
use (Refs. 89 to 92). Researchers applied (Ref. 24). Other researchers analyzing
2012, 2014, and 2020 Surgeon General’s
the 30 percent estimate to the number data from the 2021 NYTS found that a
Reports on smoking and health note that
of adolescents who were at the early sizeable proportion of high school
almost 90 percent of adults who
experimentation stage in 2000, students using tobacco products in the
currently and regularly smoke initiated
translating to approximately 2.9 million past 30 days report symptoms of
smoking by age 18, and 98 percent
of these adolescents who have or will nicotine dependence, including 27.2
initiated smoking by age 26, which is
become people who regularly smoke percent reporting a strong craving for
notable given that 25 is the approximate
cigarettes (Ref. 91). Based on the tobacco use and 19.5 percent reporting
age at which the brain has completed
number of persons under the age of 18 wanting to first use tobacco products
development (Refs. 1, 17 to 19). The
in 2012 in the United States, the U.S. within 30 minutes of waking (Ref. 25).
developing brain is more vulnerable to
Overall, these findings demonstrate that
Surgeon General estimated that
developing nicotine dependence than
youth and young adults who experiment
17,371,000 of that group would begin
the adult brain is, and the earlier an
with cigarettes (and other tobacco
smoking cigarettes regularly and
individual begins smoking the less
products) are particularly vulnerable to
5,557,000 will die from a smoking-
likely they are to quit (Ref. 20). The
the effects of nicotine on progression to
related disease (Ref. 1 at Table 12.2.1).
maximum nicotine level requirement
regular use and dependence, leading to
These concerningly high numbers speak
included in this proposed product maintained tobacco product use into
to the extreme vulnerability of youth
standard to regulate nicotine yield adulthood.
and young adults to the health harms of
would make cigarettes and certain other
combusted tobacco products minimally tobacco use resulting from addiction to C. Youth and Adult Cigarette Smoking
addictive or nonaddictive, limiting the nicotine. Cessation and Relapse
number of youth and young adults who Nicotine addiction is a critical factor Like adults, many youths who smoke
progress from experimentation to in the transition of people who smoke cigarettes want to quit but have
regular use and reducing their risk for cigarettes from experimentation to difficulty doing so. An analysis of data
smoking-related diseases. regular smoking and in the continuation from the 2015 YRBS looking at youth
There are three primary stages that of smoking for those who want to quit cigarette quit attempts found that 45.4
occur as an individual transitions from (Ref. 28 at p.113, Ref. 1). Although the percent of high school students
never smoking to smoking cigarettes majority of adolescents who smoke currently smoking cigarettes had sought
regularly: initiation, experimentation, daily meet the criteria for nicotine to quit in the previous year (Ref. 22);
and regular use. An individual initiates dependence, one study found that the 2012 NYTS data were congruent,
smoking once he or she first tries a most susceptible youth lose autonomy indicating that 51.5 percent of middle
cigarette, even one or two puffs (Ref. (i.e., independence in their actions) and high school students who smoke
17). The vast majority of smoking regarding tobacco within 1 or 2 days of cigarettes had sought to quit all tobacco
initiation occurs during adolescence first inhaling from a cigarette (Refs. 93 use in the previous year (Ref. 22).
(Ref. 17). Initiation can progress to and 94). Another study found that 19.4 For adults who smoke who report quit
experimentation, where individuals percent of adolescents (initially ages 12– attempts, few are successful. As of 2019,
continue to occasionally try cigarettes, 13 and followed over 6 years) who researchers estimate that only between
but do not smoke every day, and then smoked weekly were dependent on 5.4 and 5.6 percent of people who
to smoking regularly (i.e., smoking daily nicotine (Ref. 95). In a study regarding smoked cigarettes successfully quit for
or on most days) (Ref. 17). nicotine dependence among adolescents good, according to data from the NHIS
Adolescence is a period of who recently initiated smoking (9th and and National Survey on Drug Use and
development when individuals who 10th grade students), adolescents who Health (NSDUH), respectively (Ref. 14).
experiment with tobacco products are smoked cigarettes at the lowest levels According to recent data regarding adult
more susceptible to transitioning to (i.e., smoking on only 1 to 3 days of the quit attempts, analyses of 2022 NHIS
regular use and developing addiction to past 30 days) experienced nicotine and 2018–2019 TUS–CPS data indicate
nicotine. Data from the 2024 NYTS dependence symptoms such as loss of that 67.7 and 76.6 percent of adults,
found that 10.1 percent of high school control over smoking (42 percent) and respectively, who smoke cigarettes were
students and 5.4 percent of middle irritability after not smoking for a while interested in quitting (Refs. 4 and 36),
school students reported current use of (23 percent) (Ref. 96). Researchers in a while the 2022 NHIS data and 2018–
any tobacco product (Ref. 3). Each day, 4-year study of 6th grade students also 2019 TUS–CPS data show that only 53.3
approximately 1,200 youth (ages 18 and found that ‘‘[e]ach of the nicotine and 51.3 percent, respectively, of U.S.
below) try their first cigarette (Ref. 86 at withdrawal symptoms appeared in some adults who smoke actually made a quit
Table A.13A). The transition to regular subjects prior to daily smoking’’ (Ref. attempt within the past year (Refs. 4 and
cigarette use (i.e., smoking on ≥20 of the 93) (emphasis added). Ten percent of 36). Analyses of 2022 NHIS and 2018–
past 30 days) can occur relatively the study participants showed signs of 2019 TUS–CPS data indicates that only
quickly and can be achieved by smoking tobacco dependence within 1 or 2 days 8.8 and 7.5 percent of adults who
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5048 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
formerly smoked cigarettes had experiment with smoking and for in the United States, and cigarettes have
successfully quit smoking cigarettes, people currently smoking and who hope been shown to cause an ever-expanding
respectively (Ref. 4 and 36). Adults who to quit. number of diseases and health
smoke may make 30 or more quit conditions (Ref. 1). Every year, cigarette
D. Smoking Cigarettes and Other
attempts before succeeding (Ref. 37). smoking is the primary causal factor for
Combusted Tobacco Products Causes
Some population groups are less 163,700 deaths from cancer, 160,600
Serious Negative Health Effects
successful than others: for example, deaths from cardiovascular and
adults with education levels at or below Nicotine is a powerfully addictive metabolic diseases, and 131,100 deaths
the equivalent of a high school diploma chemical. The effects of nicotine on the from pulmonary diseases (Ref. 1 at
have the highest smoking prevalence central nervous system occur rapidly p.659). In the United States, about 87
levels but the lowest quit ratios (i.e., the after absorption (Ref. 57 at p.12). People percent of all lung cancer deaths, 32
ratio of persons who have smoked at who use cigarettes and other combusted percent of coronary heart disease
least 100 cigarettes during their lifetime tobacco products absorb nicotine readily deaths, and 79 percent of all cases of
but do not currently smoke to persons from tobacco smoke through the lungs chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
who report smoking at least 100 (Ref. 57 at p. iii), and, from the lungs, (COPD) are attributable to cigarette
cigarettes during their lifetime) (Ref. 97). nicotine is then rapidly transmitted to smoking (Ref. 1). Smoking during
Nicotine addiction and associated the brain (Ref. 57 at p.13). In the case pregnancy can result in negative
withdrawal symptoms make it difficult of cigars, nicotine is also absorbed outcomes for a newborn baby, such as
for people who smoke cigarettes to quit, through the mouth. With regular use, low birth weight, lungs that fail to
and quit rates rarely exceed 25 percent nicotine levels accumulate in the body develop properly, birth defects such as
(Ref. 98). during the day from tobacco product use cleft lip and/or cleft palate, and Sudden
and the nicotine persists overnight, Infant Death Syndrome (Ref. 101). As
Relapse is the principal limiting factor
allowing for continuous exposure stated in the 2014 Surgeon General’s
in the transition from smoking to
throughout the entire 24-hour period Report, ‘‘[c]igarette smoking has been
nonsmoking status (Ref. 28). Relapse
(Ref. 57 at p.38). While mild nicotine causally linked to diseases of nearly all
refers to the point after an attempt to
intoxication can occur among people organs of the body, to diminished health
stop smoking when a person’s tobacco
who are smoking for the first time (Ref. status, and to harm to the fetus . . .
use again becomes ongoing and
57 at p. 15–16), tolerance to the effects [and] the burden of death and disease
persistent (Ref. 28 citing Brandon et al.,
of nicotine develops rapidly. from tobacco use in the United States is
1986). Most people who relapse do so Cigarette smoking is responsible for overwhelmingly caused by cigarettes
soon after their quit attempt (Ref. 28). 480,000 premature deaths every year and other combusted tobacco products’’
One study found that 80 to 90 percent from many diseases, puts a substantial (Ref. 1 at p.7).
of individuals who were smoking at 6 burden on the U.S. healthcare system, Tobacco and cigarette smoking-related
months following a quit attempt had and causes massive economic losses to morbidity and mortality also have been
resumed smoking within 2 weeks society (Ref. 1 at p. 659–666). In terms experienced differentially across
following their quit attempt (Ref. 99). of a monetary measure of the impact of different sociodemographic
However, even those who quit smoking cigarette smoking on the public health, characteristics, such as race, ethnicity,
for longer periods of time frequently in 2018 smoking cost the United States socioeconomic status, educational
relapse. Long-term studies of more than $600 billion, including more attainment, mental health status, and
individuals trying to quit smoking than $240 billion in healthcare spending homelessness. Black14adults, and in
reveal that 30 to 40 percent of those who (Ref. 10), nearly $185 billion in lost particular Black men, experience the
quit smoking for 1 year eventually productivity from smoking-related highest rates of incidence and mortality
relapsed (Ref. 99). In addition, one illnesses and health conditions (Ref. 10), from many tobacco-related cancers,
study following 840 participants for nearly $180 billion in lost productivity such as lung and bronchus cancer and
more than 8 years found that from smoking-related premature death head and neck cancer, compared to
approximately one-half of people who (Refs. 1 and 10), and $7 billion in lost those from other racial and ethnic
smoke who stopped smoking for 1 year productivity from premature death from groups (Refs. 102 to 104). Deaths from
relapsed to regular smoking within the secondhand smoke exposure (Refs. 1 other tobacco-related conditions such as
subsequent 7 years (Ref. 100). and 11). Current evidence shows that, heart disease, stroke, and hypertension
Researchers have found that a higher while nicotine itself is not the direct are higher among Black individuals
frequency of smoking is associated with cause of most smoking-related diseases, compared to other racial and ethnic
earlier lapses after cessation (e.g., addiction to the nicotine in tobacco groups regardless of tobacco use status
smoking on the first day of cessation or products is the proximate driver of (Refs. 105 to 110). Compared to persons
within the first 2 weeks), which in turn tobacco-related death and disease identifying as non-Hispanic White,
is strongly associated with an increased because it sustains tobacco use even Hispanic and Black persons smoke
risk of relapse, and is also associated when people who smoke want to quit fewer cigarettes (Refs. 111 to 113) and
with more severe withdrawal symptoms (which most people who smoke report are more likely to be people who do not
and earlier relapse after an attempt to wanting to do) (Refs. 1, 13, 28, 58, and smoke daily (Refs. 111 and 114), yet
quit smoking (Ref. 28 at p.119). These 61). Inhalation of smoke from cigarettes
findings confirm the powerful addictive and other combusted tobacco products
14Throughout this document, FDA uses both the
properties of nicotine in tobacco exposes people who use the products to terms ‘‘Black’’ and ‘‘African American.’’ The term
products, a principal factor limiting the over 7,000 chemicals, many known to ‘‘African American’’ is used to describe or refer to
ability to quit for a person who uses be hazardous to health and lead to a person of African ancestral origins or who
identifies as African American. ‘‘Black’’ is used to
combusted tobacco products, and disease (Ref. 28). According to the 2014 broadly describe or refer to a person who identifies
further underscore the public health Surgeon General’s Report, which with that term. Though these terms may overlap,
importance of decreasing the summarizes thousands of peer-reviewed they are distinct concepts (e.g., a Black person may
addictiveness of these products by scientific studies and is itself peer- not identify as African American). As a result, FDA
relies on the specific term used by researchers when
decreasing nicotine yield, particularly reviewed, smoking remains the leading
citing to specific studies. FDA uses the term
for youth and young adults who preventable cause of disease and death ‘‘Black’’ when not citing to a specific study.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5049
have greater risk of lung cancer comorbidities have higher prevalence of country’s leading cause of cancer death
morbidity and mortality (Refs. 1, 115 to combusted tobacco use compared to (Refs. 1, 28, 63, and 136).
118). Additionally, American Indian/ those without these conditions (Refs.
Cigarettes and other combusted
Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations have 128 and 129) and have increased risk of
tobacco products also have deadly
the highest cigarette use prevalence tobacco-related morbidity and mortality
effects on people who do not smoke
(Refs. 119 to 121) and are more likely to (Refs. 120, 130, and 131). Inpatient
because they produce secondhand
suffer disproportionate rates of tobacco- hospital admission data from 1990 to
smoke. It is well-established that
related death (Ref. 119). An analysis of 2005 from California indicate that
secondhand tobacco smoke causes
2001–2009 mortality data for people approximately half of the deaths in
premature death and disease in children
living in the Indian Health Service those who had been hospitalized for
and in adults who do not smoke (Ref.
Contract Health Service Delivery Area schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or
15 at p.11). Secondhand smoke
counties in the United States indicated major depressive disorder were due to
exposure is currently estimated to be
that age-adjusted death rates, smoking- diseases causally linked to tobacco use
responsible for over 41,000 deaths
attributable fractions, and smoking- (Ref. 130) and that the majority of
annually in the United States (Ref. 1).
attributable mortality for all-cause deaths for those hospitalized for opioid-
For example, an estimated 7,300 lung
mortality were statistically significantly related conditions were related to
cancer deaths and nearly 34,000
higher among AI/AN populations than tobacco and alcohol, not to opioids (Ref.
coronary heart disease deaths annually
among White populations for adult men 132). Tobacco-related cancers are a
can be attributed to secondhand smoke
and women aged 35 years and older leading cause of death among adults
(Ref. 1). Additionally, productivity
(Ref. 122). Cigarette smoking caused 21 experiencing homelessness (Ref. 133).
losses due to secondhand smoke-
percent of ischemic heart disease, 15 While cigarette smoking and exposure
percent of other heart disease, and 17 to cigarette smoke are responsible for attributable deaths are estimated to cost
percent of stroke deaths in AI/AN men, significant mortality—480,000 the United States $5.6 billion each year
compared with 15 percent, 10 percent, premature deaths annually, as (Ref. 1).
and 9 percent, respectively, for White previously stated—this estimate does Secondhand smoke is particularly
men (Ref. 122). Among AI/AN women, not include deaths caused by other harmful to children. For instance, the
smoking caused 18 percent of ischemic tobacco products, such as cigars and 2014 Surgeon General’s Report
heart disease deaths, 13 percent of other pipes (Ref. 1 at p. 665).15Additionally, estimated that each year, secondhand
heart disease deaths, and 20 percent of for every person who dies from a smoke is associated with 150,000 to
stroke deaths, compared with 9 percent, smoking-related disease in the United 300,000 lower respiratory tract
7 percent, and 10 percent, respectively, States, approximately 30 more people infections in infants and children under
among White women (Ref. 122). Some will suffer from at least one smoking- 18 months of age, 790,000 doctor’s
Asian populations, Native Hawaiians, related disease (Ref. 1). office visits related to ear infections, and
and other Pacific Islander populations Inhalation of the chemicals produced 202,000 asthma cases (Refs. 1 and 137).
also suffer from disproportionate rates by combustion results in numerous In addition, thirdhand smoke—the
of tobacco-related mortality as adverse health outcomes through chemical residue from combusted
compared to non-Hispanic White mechanisms that include DNA damage, tobacco smoke that can become
persons (Refs. 115, 117, 123, and 124). inflammation, and oxidative stress (Ref.
embedded in the environment (e.g.,
Disparities in tobacco-related 28). The three leading causes of carpet, dust)—results in exposure to
morbidity and mortality have also been smoking-attributable death for people harmful constituents such as tobacco
observed for additional population who currently and formerly smoke specific nitrosamines (Ref. 138).
groups that have higher levels of cigarettes are lung cancer, heart disease, Exposure to thirdhand smoke is
tobacco use. Those with low household and COPD (Ref. 1 at p. 660). Cigarette especially concerning for young
income and/or educational attainment smoking results in a chronic children given their size and behaviors,
bear a disproportionate burden of inflammatory state in the cardiovascular like crawling on the ground and
myocardial infarction prevalence and system that is known to be a powerful frequently putting their hands in their
coronary heart disease-related mortality predictor of cardiovascular events mouths.
(Ref. 125). National Health and including heart disease (Ref. 28). For
Nutrition Examination Survey COPD, although studies have shown Additionally, the burden of
(NHANES) data from 2007 to 2010 that the disease can be almost secondhand smoke exposure is
indicate that prevalence of co-occurring completely prevented with the experienced disproportionately among
obesity and smoking was linearly elimination of smoking (Ref. 63), for members of some racial and ethnic
associated with educational attainment those who have already developed the groups and people with lower
as women with the lowest levels of disease, evidence indicates that the household income and educational
education had greater likelihood of related morbidity persists long after attainment. Among people who do not
being obese and smoking than women cessation of smoking (Ref. 28). In smoke, ages 3 and older, findings from
with the highest levels of education addition, it has been established that 2011 to 2018 NHANES data indicate
(Ref. 126). Some research also indicates more than 85 percent of lung cancers are that non-Hispanic Black respondents
that race/ethnicity status interacts with due to smoking, and lung cancer is the and those living below the poverty level
the effects of higher educational had the highest levels of secondhand
attainment on the likelihood of current 15Regular cigar smoking was responsible for smoke exposure compared to people of
smoking. The protective effect of higher approximately 9,000 premature deaths and more other races and those living above the
education against current smoking was than 140,000 years of potential life lost among poverty level, respectively; these adults aged 35 years or older in 2010 (Ref. 134). The
shown to be a stronger effect for White 2014 Surgeon General’s Report states that the disparities persisted across all years of
as compared to Black respondents (Ref. methodology for estimating the current population the study analysis from 2011 to 2018
127). Research has also demonstrated burden for use of combusted tobacco products other (Ref. 139). From 1999 to 2012, the
that individuals with behavioral health than cigarettes remains under discussion, but the percentage of persons who do not smoke
number of added deaths is expected to be in the
conditions and other medical thousands per year (Refs. 1 and 135). (ages 3 and older) with detectable serum
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5050 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
cotinine16levels (defined in the study Disparities in the secondhand smoke smoke in their homes in the past 7 days,
as levels ≥0.05 nanogram per milliliter exposure are found across various compared with 43.9 percent of people
to indicate secondhand smoke environmental settings. These who did not smoke and did not have a
exposure) declined across all racial and disparities speak to the interrelated smokefree rule at home (Ref. 147). A
ethnic groups (Ref. 141). However, a influences of individual factors (e.g., similar pattern was observed across age
higher proportion of non-Hispanic Black age, race and ethnicity, sexual groups, race and ethnicity, and levels of
individuals who do not smoke orientation, income) and existing educational attainment. For example, a
continued to have detectable serum inequities in places where members of higher percentage of Black and Hispanic
cotinine levels, compared to Hispanic communities disproportionally people were exposed to secondhand
and non-Hispanic White individuals impacted by tobacco-related health tobacco smoke in homes with and
who do not smoke. For example, in disparities are likely to reside, spend without smokefree rules than White
2017–2018, nearly 50 percent of non- time, and work (Refs. 53 and 120). For people. Additionally, a study using
Hispanic Black people who do not example, an analysis of NHANES data 1995–2007 TUS–CPS data found that
smoke had detectable serum cotinine from 2017–2018 found that 87.8 percent among two parent households, higher
levels, compared with 22 percent of of non-smoking persons 3 years of age levels of parental educational level and
non-Hispanic White and 17 percent of and older who lived with someone who annual household income were
Mexican American people who do not smoked inside the home was exposed to associated with the higher reporting of
smoke (Ref. 141). Moreover, disparities secondhand smoke based on serum a complete home ban as compared to
in trends in detectable serum cotinine cotinine values of 0.05–10.00 nanogram lower levels of parental educational and
levels among people who do not use per milliliter compared to 21.4 percent annual household income (Ref. 148).
cigarettes over time have been observed of non-smoking persons 3 years of age Such findings emphasize the degree to
on the basis of race/ethnicity. One and older not living with someone who which certain aspects of disadvantage
analysis of NHANES data and found smoked inside the home (Ref. 142). In (such as lower family income, lack of
that from 1999 to 2012 among children terms of race and ethnicity, findings access to single-family housing, or lack
ages 3–11, comparable levels of decline drawn from the 2013–2016 NHANES of autonomy over the home
were observed among non-Hispanic data indicate that compared to non- environment) may compound tobacco-
White (percentage change: 41.2 percent) Hispanic White respondents, non- related health disparities.
and Mexican American (percentage Hispanic Black respondents had higher Individuals who live in multi-unit
change: 39.0 percent) youth, but a lesser odds of secondhand smoke exposure in housing, including apartments, are
decline was observed among non- homes other than their own (Ref. 144). particularly susceptible to involuntary
Hispanic Black youth (percentage An analysis of NYTS data indicates that secondhand smoke exposure in the
change: 19.8 percent) (Ref. 141). A more non-Hispanic Black and non-Hispanic home, as secondhand smoke can
recent analysis of NHANES data also White students both had higher infiltrate throughout a building along
indicated that, between 2011 and 2018, prevalence of secondhand smoke various pathways (Refs. 149 to 153).
the percentage of people who do not use exposure at home and in vehicles than Exposures to secondhand smoke in
cigarettes with detectable serum Hispanic and non-Hispanic other race/ multi-unit housing are potentially
cotinine levels increased among non- ethnicity students (Ref. 145). While concerning given a study drawing on
Hispanic Black youth ages 12–19 but secondhand smoke exposure in homes the 2013–2014 National Adult Tobacco
remained stagnant among non-Hispanic and vehicles declined from 2011 to Survey (NATS) found that tobacco use
White youth of the same ages (Ref. 142). 2018, secondhand smoke exposure in was higher among adults living in
Moreover, there is also some scientific homes among non-Hispanic Black multi-unit housing (24.7 percent) than
evidence supporting disparities in students did not change (Ref. 145). those in single-family housing (18.9
secondhand smoke exposure by sexual Additionally, a study using data from percent) (Ref. 154). This study also
orientation. An analysis of NHANES Wave 1 (2013–2014) of the Population found that smoke-free home rules (i.e.,
data from 2003–2010 found that Assessment of Tobacco and Health home smoking bans) were higher among
secondhand smoke exposure (defined as (PATH) Study found that the odds of adults living in single-family housing
a serum continine17levels ≥0.05 exposure to secondhand smoke at home (86.7 percent) than those in multi-unit
nanogram per milliliter) differed by were higher for Black adults (OR=1.12, housing (80.9 percent) (Ref. 154).
sexual orientation among women 20–59 95 percent CI:1.00–1.24; p-value=0.042) However, more than a third (34.4
years of age (Ref. 143). This study found than White adults; and higher for those percent) of multi-unit housing residents
that among women 20–59 years of age, adults who self-identified as being with home smoking bans have
secondhand smoke exposure was higher LGBT (OR=1.30, 95 percent CI:1.11– experienced secondhand smoke
among non-smoking women who 1.52; p-value=0.001) than for incursions (Ref. 154). Recent estimates
identified as lesbian (56.2 percent) or heterosexual adults (Ref. 146). Home indicate that approximately 80 million
who reported a lifetime experience with smoking bans (i.e., when people decide residents in the United States are
a same-gender partner (47.7 percent) to have their own rules that restrict or currently living in some type of multi-
than those women who identified as ban smoking inside their own home)— unit housing (Ref. 150). Among those
exclusively heterosexual (33.0 percent; can reduce secondhand smoke living in multi-unit housing with a
p<0.001) (Ref. 143). However, among exposure. For example, a study using home smoking ban, an estimated 27.6–
men 20–59 years of age, exposure to data from the 2009–2010 National Adult 28.9 million are exposed to secondhand
secondhand smoke did not significantly Tobacco Survey (NATS) found the smoke incursions from neighboring
differ by sexual orientation. prevalence of exposure to secondhand units and/or shared common areas (Ref.
smoke varied based on the presence (or 150). Moreover, a 2013 nationally
16Cotinine is an alkaloid found in tobacco leaves absence) of smokefree rules in the home representative study conducted among
and is the main metabolite of nicotine. Measuring (Ref. 147). This study found that overall, U.S. adults living in multi-unit housing
cotinine in people’s blood is a reliable way to 1.4 percent of people who did not found that 25.2 percent of non-smoking
determine exposure to nicotine for both people who
smoke and had a smokefree rule at residents who had no smoking in the
smoke and those exposed to environmental tobacco
smoke (Ref. 140). home were exposed to secondhand home for at least 3 months and who also
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5051
had a child in the home had a recent cigarette smoke due to the relatively (Ref. 158). Additional evidence suggests
secondhand smoke incursion into their high concentration of nitrate in cigar that cigar and/or pipe smoking is
unit; 99 percent of these residents also tobacco, which leads to formation of causally associated with cancers of the
reported being bothered by the cancer-causing nitrosamines during the pancreas, stomach, and bladder (Ref.
incursion (Ref. 155). Multi-unit housing fermentation process (Refs. 1; 53 at 165). People who smoke cigars also have
secondhand smoke incursions have also Chapter 3; and 158). Researchers have increased risks for coronary heart
been found to be greater among specific found urinary concentrations of 4- disease and COPD compared with
populations that are already (methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1- people who never used tobacco (Ref.
disproportionately burdened by butanol (NNAL) (a hazardous tobacco- 166).
tobacco-related disease and death, specific nitrosamine) measured in One study using NATS data from
including women, younger adults, and people who smoke cigars daily to be as 2009 to 2010 found that regular cigar
non-Hispanic Black, Hispanic, and high as those measured in people who smoking (defined as use on at least 15
lower income populations (Ref. 154). smoke cigarettes daily (Refs. 159 and of the past 30 days) was responsible for
Workplace secondhand smoke 160). Like exposure to cigarette smoke, approximately 9,000 premature deaths
exposure has also been shown to vary exposure to higher levels of cigar smoke and more than 140,000 years of
across population groups. A study using for longer time periods increases the potential life lost among adults aged 35
data from the 2009–2010 NATS show adverse health risks caused by cigar years or older in 2010 (Ref. 134). A
the prevalence of secondhand smoke smoking (Ref. 28). study of healthcare expenditures from
exposure from employed nonsmoking Consequently, there is a long-standing 2000 to 2015 found that cigar-
adults was higher among males, non- body of research, including reports from attributable healthcare expenditures for
Hispanic Black, Hispanic, and AI/AN the U.S. Surgeon General and National adults totaled $1.75 billion per year,
people compared with White people, Cancer Institute (NCI), demonstrating with $284 million attributed to
and people with low education and low that cigar use causes serious adverse exclusive cigar smoking and $1.5 billion
income (Ref. 156). Similarly, data from health effects (Ref. 53 at p.119–155; attributed to poly tobacco use (i.e., use
the 2010 and 2015 NHIS show that Refs. 55; 161, and 162). NCI’s Smoking of multiple tobacco products) involving
exposure to secondhand smoke in the and Tobacco Control Monograph No. 9 cigar smoking plus cigarette or
workplace was disproportionately high (‘‘Cigars: Health Effects and Trends’’), smokeless tobacco use (Ref. 167). In
among non-Hispanic Black respondents, which provides a comprehensive, peer- addition, overall mortality rates for all
Hispanic respondents, and workers with reviewed analysis of the trends in cigar people who smoked cigars (i.e., those
low education and low income (Ref. smoking and potential public health who report inhaling as well as those
157). Additionally, the study findings consequences, as well as other research, who report not inhaling cigar smoke) are
indicated that ‘‘blue-collar workers’’ demonstrates that cigar smoking leads to higher than rates for those who have
(defined as those who performed an increased risk of oral, laryngeal, never smoked, although they are
manual labor such as manufacturing, esophageal, pharyngeal, and lung generally lower than the rates observed
mining, sanitation, and construction) cancers, as well as coronary heart for people who smoke cigarettes (Ref. 53
experienced higher prevalence of disease and aortic aneurysm, with the at p. 112). In an analysis of National
secondhand smoke exposure compared magnitude of risk a function of the Longitudinal Mortality Study (NLMS)
to ‘‘white-collar workers’’ (defined as amount smoked and depth of inhalation data, researchers also found that the risk
those who primarily work in an office, (Ref. 53 at p.119–155). Likewise, a of dying from tobacco-related cancers is
with computer and desk setting, and systematic review of the mortality risks higher for people who currently
perform professional, managerial, or associated with cigar smoking that exclusively use pipe tobacco and those
administrative work) (Ref. 157). identified 22 studies found that people who currently exclusively smoke cigars
The disparities observed in tobacco who regularly smoke cigars are at than for those who reported never using
use, as well as disparities in increased risk for many of the same combusted tobacco products (Ref. 168).
secondhand smoke exposure, contribute diseases as people who smoke Another similar analysis using the
to the disparities in tobacco-related cigarettes, including oral, laryngeal, restricted-use National Health Interview
morbidity and mortality experienced by esophageal, and lung cancer; Survey-Linked Mortality Files (NHIS–
some population groups. This proposed cardiovascular diseases; and COPD (Ref. LMF), following participants for
product standard is anticipated to 163). mortality from 2000 through 2015,
reduce smoking-related morbidity and Research indicates that most people observed that people who currently
mortality for the population as a whole, who smoke cigars do inhale some smoked cigars daily had elevated risk of
including these populations that use amount of smoke, even when they do all-cause mortality compared to those
tobacco or are exposed to secondhand not intend to inhale, and are not aware who had never used tobacco (Ref. 169).
smoke at disproportionately high levels. of doing so (Refs. 54 and 55). Even when In addition, researchers studying people
Other combusted tobacco products, people who smoke cigars do not breathe who smoke cigars in 2009 and 2010
particularly those that could serve as smoke into their lungs, they are still found that the average person who
alternatives to cigarettes if people who subject to the addictive effects of smokes cigars or pipes loses
smoke cigarettes no longer had access to nicotine through nicotine absorption approximately 15 life years (Ref. 134).
normal nicotine cigarettes (NNC), cause (Refs. 55 and 56). This nicotine Disparities in cigar-related health
similar negative health effects. For absorption occurs because cigar smoke outcomes have also been observed by
example, cigar smoke contains many of dissolves in saliva, allowing the person gender and race/ethnicity. Likely due to
the same harmful constituents as smoking the cigar to absorb sufficient the greater prevalence of cigar use
cigarette smoke, and cigar smoke may nicotine by holding the smoke in their among men versus women, one analysis
have even higher levels of several mouths, even if the smoke is not inhaled observed a significantly greater number
harmful compounds compared to (Refs. 53, 56, and 164). Cigar and/or of years of potential life lost for men
cigarette smoke (Refs. 1, 134 and 158). pipe smoking causes cancers of the lung than women (117,440 for men; 22,284
For example, cigar smoke contains and upper aerodigestive tract, including for women) associated with cigar use, as
higher amounts of carcinogenic, the oral cavity, oropharynx, well as disparate monetary losses
tobacco-specific N-nitrosamines than hypopharynx, larynx and esophagus associated with cigar use ($19.5 billion
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5052 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
for men; $3.4 billion for women) based increased combustible tobacco product policy priority and an important
on the value of a statistical life year (Ref. use among youth (Ref. 193). component of fulfilling FDA’s mission
134). Studies have shown that levels of Industry marketing tactics have also to protect and promote public health.
nicotine and other carcinogens in cigars included the incorporation of culture- FDA and the Federal Government
can be higher than those in cigarettes specific imagery, traditional practices, recognize the advancement of health
and may be at levels that lead to and events that target specific racial and equity as ‘‘both a moral imperative and
increased risk of morbidity and ethnic groups. For instance, tobacco pragmatic policy,’’ as Executive Order
mortality from conditions such as companies have sponsored cultural 13995 states. Considerations related to
cancer, cardiovascular disease, and events such as Cinco de Mayo health equity helped inform FDA’s
COPD (Refs. 134, 163, and 164). The celebrations, Chinese New Year decision to prioritize this proposed
prevalence of cigar smoking among AI/ celebrations, and activities related to product standard.
AN populations is lower than Black History Month (Refs. 173 and 194)
F. Consumer Knowledge, Attitudes,
prevalence among Black populations, and have used the cultural significance
Beliefs, and Perceptions About Nicotine
but higher than among Hispanic and of traditional tobacco to validate the
Asian populations (Refs. 120 and 121), authenticity of commercially available The science on consumer knowledge,
contributing to the disproportionate cigarettes, exploiting the traditions of attitudes, beliefs, and perceptions about
prevalence of lung cancer and Native people to encourage cigarette use nicotine demonstrates that a majority of
cardiovascular diseases in these (Ref. 195). Tobacco industry documents consumers correctly understand that
populations (Refs. 170 and 171). show that tobacco companies have nicotine is the substance in cigarettes
strategically marketed their products to that causes addiction. Nationally
E. Tobacco Product Marketing Has
women with lower income, particularly representative studies that examined
Contributed to Disparities in Use and
Black and Hispanic women, (Ref. 196), nicotine addiction beliefs in the general
Health Outcomes
people experiencing homelessness and population reported that the belief that
Tobacco companies have long people with mental illness (Refs. 197 nicotine is addictive was endorsed by
understood the complexities of nicotine and 198), and the LGBTQI+ community approximately 85.8 percent of the
addiction (Ref. 172) and have (Refs. 199 to 201). Research also population, and the belief that nicotine
capitalized on the psychological and demonstrates that since at least the is responsible for driving continued
sociological aspects of tobacco use to 1960s, the tobacco industry has made cigarette use was endorsed by
market their products strategic donations to organizations approximately 82.9 percent of the
disproportionately to specific representing and affiliated with these population (Refs. 227 to 233). A
populations, such as youth and young communities (Refs. 120, 202 to 205). nationally representative survey found
adults, some racial and ethnic Internal industry documents reveal that that 88 percent of people who currently
populations, individuals who identify at least one tobacco company smoke cigarettes and 91 percent of
as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, considered such donations to be a ‘‘quid people who use e-cigarettes agreed that
queer, and intersex (LGBTQI+),17those pro quo,’’ because they could result in nicotine makes people want to smoke
with lower household income and the normalization of tobacco use, (Ref. 227). A nationally representative
educational attainment, and individuals development of brand loyalty, and study of youth suggests that about 77.1
with behavioral health conditions (Refs. opposition to health-protective tobacco percent of respondents believe that
173 and 174). For example, retail control policies (Ref. 206). nicotine definitely or probably causes
advertising for tobacco products is more The industry’s practices have resulted addiction (Ref. 234).
common in neighborhoods with greater in long-term consequences for However, in contrast to high rates of
proportions of Black residents and in communities. Tobacco marketing correct beliefs about the addictiveness
lower income neighborhoods (Refs. 175 influences social norms around tobacco of nicotine, there are high rates of
to 179). Storefront and outdoor tobacco use, making it more socially acceptable incorrect beliefs about the harms of
marketing, as well as point-of-sale and increasing the likelihood of use nicotine. Studies that examined nicotine
marketing, are all disproportionately (Refs. 207 to 209). In communities harm beliefs in the general population
present in Black, Hispanic/Latino, AI/ where the tobacco industry has reported that the belief that nicotine
AN, and low-income communities (Refs. disproportionately marketed to causes cancer was endorsed by 40 to 78
175, 179, 180 to 187). Higher exposure historically marginalized populations percent of adult participants (Refs. 227,
to tobacco advertisements and retailing over decades, these social norms are 228, 232, 233, 235 to 245). Additionally,
is associated with tobacco use transferred through peers and family a nationally representative study of
susceptibility and tobacco use among generations, perpetuating the use of youth suggests that about 74.7 percent
youth, with observed disparities harmful combusted tobacco products, believe that nicotine definitely or
impacting youth who are Black, and contributing to present-day tobacco- probably causes cancer (Ref. 234).
Hispanic, or lower socioeconomic status related health disparities in these Multiple nationally representative
(Refs. 188 to 192). For example, a populations (Refs. 207, 210, and 211). studies that examined nicotine harm
systematic review of 35 studies found Moreover, recent scientific evidence perceptions by tobacco use status found
that a higher density of tobacco retailers indicates that tobacco companies that 52 to 61 percent of people who
near the home is associated with continue to target populations that currently use cigarettes and up to 84
experience tobacco-related health percent of people who do not use
17Throughout this document, FDA uses the term disparities with tobacco marketing cigarettes endorsed the belief that
‘‘LGBTQI+’’ broadly when referring to lesbian, gay, (Refs. 178, 180, 191, 207, 212 to 226). nicotine itself causes cancer or that
bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex Although targeted marketing is only nicotine is the major contributing
communities. When we describe findings from the
one factor in the development and constituent in cigarettes that causes published literature, we refer specifically to the
groups that are studied. For example, some authors perpetuation of combusted tobacco cancer (Refs. 228, 241, and 245). A more
examine tobacco-related outcomes for members product use and related harms, it recent qualitative study of people who
who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or contributes to disparities that affect currently use little cigars and cigarillos
transgender only; as such, the data are limited to
public health and are of great concern suggests that the misperception that
those who identify as LGBT, and authors interpret
the findings for those specific groups. to FDA. Advancing health equity is a nicotine has significant adverse health
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5053
effects is also common among people section, we describe some of the are currently being marketed and sold to
who use these products (Refs. 228, 241, industry’s early and continuing efforts consumers in select U.S. markets as
245, and 246). Although nicotine creates to develop VLNC cigarettes. cigarettes with 95 percent less nicotine
and sustains addiction and therefore is Some of the earliest VLNC cigarettes than conventional cigarettes. From
the driver of the death and disease studied by academic researchers were January 1, 2023, to November 22, 2024,
associated with smoking, it is the produced by Philip Morris and 22nd Century VLN cigarette dollar sales
repeated exposure to toxicants from marketed under the brand name ‘‘Next,’’ accounted for less than 0.001 percent of
tobacco products that directly causes which was reported to contain 0.4 mg total cigarette dollar sales in any 4week
most of the serious health effects among nicotine per gram of total tobacco (Ref. period. Menthol flavored 22nd Century
those who use tobacco products, 248). Later, the National Institute on VLN cigarettes over the same time
including fatal lung diseases, such as Drug Abuse (NIDA) contracted with the accounted for less than 0.001percent of
COPD, and cancer (Ref. 28). Ultratech/Lifetech Corporation19to any 4-week menthol flavored cigarette
Consumer misperceptions regarding produce VLNC cigarettes for research dollar sales.20
the harms associated with nicotine may purposes only (Refs. 249 and 250). The Currently, these are the only
lead to inaccurate judgments about the two types of cigarettes produced were: authorized VLNC cigarettes. As we
risks of using products that contain (1) 8.0–10.3 mg nicotine per gram of discuss in other parts of this document
nicotine, including NRT. For example, total tobacco and (2) 0.6–0.7 mg nicotine (see section VII.E), we believe the
individuals who hold a misperception per gram of total tobacco (Ref. 250). scientific evidence supports the
about nicotine may be less likely to use Commercially available Quest technical achievability of the proposed
NRT as a smoking cessation aid. cigarettes were produced and marketed standard; additionally, the tobacco
Furthermore, there is evidence that by Vector Tobacco in the early 2000s industry and consumer product
misperceptions of nicotine harm vary by and utilized genetically engineered companies have developed a range of
gender, ethnicity, and age, and may tobacco to create cigarettes with three brands with differing nicotine levels.
contribute to unequal health outcomes distinct nicotine content levels (i.e., Thus, it appears there would be
(Ref. 233). FDA recognizes the Quest 1 (12.7 mg/g), Quest 2 (7.3 mg/g), opportunities for any manufacturer who
importance of addressing nicotine Quest 3 (0.9 mg/g)) (table 1). These chooses to enter the market for products
misperceptions in the context of a cigarettes were used in much of the covered by this proposed product
proposed product standard that limits VLNC research conducted prior to the standard.
the level of nicotine in cigarettes and development of SPECTRUM Nicotine Although many of the studies
certain other combusted tobacco Research Cigarettes; they are no longer discussed in this section investigated
products in order to make those on the market. Philip Morris also the effects of VLNC cigarettes, some
products minimally addictive or manufactured cigarettes with varying studies also investigated the effects of
nonaddictive. FDA will continue to nicotine levels for research only (Ref. cigarettes with higher levels of nicotine,
conduct research and develop 251). In a public statement issued on often as comparators. Table 1 displays
communication tools (e.g., consumer July, 2018, 22nd Century Group, Inc. the reduced nicotine content cigarettes
outreach, public education initiatives, stated that they were already using that were administered in studies
engagement with interested parties) to genetic engineering and plant breeding summarized in this document and their
ensure that consumers are informed of to produce VLNC tobacco for cigarettes reported nicotine levels. The nicotine
the risks of using tobacco products that (Ref. 252). In 2014, the company was content values in table 1 are
contain nicotine, including the products granted patents for its process to approximate, and they are primarily
covered under this proposed product dramatically reduce the nicotine in based on published reports from the
standard. tobacco plants (Ref. 253). This tobacco peer-reviewed scientific literature. Most
V. History and Perceptions of VLNC has been used to generate low nicotine studies that investigated the clinical
Cigarettes content research cigarettes, produced effects of reduced nicotine content
and distributed by RTI International, cigarettes did not chemically analyze
A. History of LNC and VLNC Cigarettes under a contract with the NIDA Drug the study cigarettes. For example, many
Tobacco companies had the technical Supply Program (Ref. 254). 22nd studies that examined the effects of
expertise to manipulate the nicotine Century Group, Inc. acts as a vendor for VLNC SPECTRUM Nicotine Research
content in tobacco as early as the 1920s RTI for this contract, manufacturing Cigarettes did not chemically
and then began to market products that SPECTRUM Nicotine Research characterize these cigarettes, but the
may have met very low nicotine content Cigarettes that were reported to contain authors of these studies reported that
(VLNC)18cigarette levels throughout 0.4 mg nicotine per gram of tobacco the nicotine content of the cigarettes
the late 1970s and early 1980s (Ref. (Ref. 254), and they also manufacture was 0.4 mg nicotine per gram of
247). As discussed above, the term cigarettes with other reduced levels of
‘‘VLNC cigarettes’’ generally refers to nicotine. These SPECTRUM Nicotine 20FDA’s own analyses, calculations and
combusted cigarettes that have been Research Cigarettes are similar in many conclusions informed in part by the NielsenIQ
reported to contain ≤1.0 mg nicotine per sensory characteristics to NNC Retail Measurement Service (RMS) data through
NielsenIQ’s RMS for the tobacco product category
gram of total tobacco. For a detailed cigarettes, but with VLNC (Refs. 255 and ‘‘Cigarettes’’ for the time period January 1, 2023
discussion of the scientific evidence 256). through November 2, 2024 for Total US Expanded
that supports the technical achievability In 2019, 22nd Century Group, Inc. All Outlets Combined (xAOC) and convenience
stores are those of FDA and do not reflect the views
of this proposed product standard, see received FDA marketing authorization
of NielsenIQ. NielsenIQ is not responsible for, had
section VII.E of this document. In this and, in 2021, received exposure no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and
modification orders for their VLNC preparing the results reported herein, or in
18As previously noted in footnote 7, the term cigarettes under the names VLN King developing, reviewing, or confirming the research
VLNC should not be confused with the cigarette and VLN Menthol King. VLN cigarettes approaches used in connection with this report.
brand name ‘‘VLN;’’ ‘‘VLN’’ refers to cigarette NielsenIQ RMS data consist of weekly purchase and
products authorized for marketing by FDA in 2019. pricing data generated from participating retail store
See https://www.fda.gov/media/133633/download? 19Both Ultratech and Lifetech have been reported point-of-sale systems in all U.S. markets. See
attachment and https://www.fda.gov/media/ as being the company through which NIDA https://NielsenIQ.com/global/en/ for more
133635/download?attachment. manufactured research cigarettes. information.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5054 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
tobacco. The actual nicotine content of is lower than the 0.4 mg nicotine per total tobacco, with a range of 0.4 to 0.7
these cigarettes is expected to vary gram level typically reported in the mg nicotine per gram of total tobacco. It
around this value. For example, the literature. In 22nd Century Group, Inc.’s is likely that the Quest and SPECTRUM
results of one study that chemically modified risk tobacco product Nicotine Research Cigarettes, used
characterized SPECTRUM Nicotine applications, the company reported that throughout the scientific literature, also
Research Cigarettes showed that the after 9 years of sampling by the contained between 0.4 to 0.7 mg
nicotine content of the sampled VLNC company, the average nicotine content
nicotine per gram of total tobacco (Ref.
cigarettes ranged between 0.28 and 0.33 of its genetically engineered VLNC
257).
mg nicotine per gram (Ref. 256), which tobacco is 0.6 mg nicotine per gram of
TABLE 1—NICOTINE CONTENT FOR NORMAL, LOW, AND VERY LOW NICOTINE CONTENT CIGARETTES USED IN THE
RESEARCH STUDIES CITED IN THIS DOCUMENT
Nicotine
Nicotine content
Brand Manufacturer content
(mg/g)
category
Magic1 ............................................................................................. 22nd Century Group, Inc ............................ VLNC ...... *1.0
Next2 ............................................................................................... Philip Morris International ........................... VLNC ...... *0.4
Philip Morris 1 mg3 ......................................................................... Philip Morris Tobacco Company ................ VLNC ...... *0.7–0.9
Philip Morris 2 mg3 ......................................................................... Philip Morris Tobacco Company ................ LNC......... *2.1–2.4
Philip Morris 4 mg3 ......................................................................... Philip Morris Tobacco Company ................ LNC......... *5.0–5.6
Philip Morris 8 mg3 ......................................................................... Philip Morris Tobacco Company ................ LNC......... *9.3–10.6
Philip Morris 12 mg3 ....................................................................... Philip Morris Tobacco Company ................ NNC ........ *14.4–14.7
Quest 1............................................................................................ Vector Group Ltd ........................................ NNC ........ *12.7
Quest 2............................................................................................ Vector Group Ltd ........................................ LNC......... *7.3
Quest 3............................................................................................ Vector Group Ltd ........................................ VLNC ...... *0.9
SPECTRUM 0.4 mg (NRC102–NRC105)4..................................... 22nd Century Group, Inc ............................ VLNC ...... 0.4–0.7
SPECTRUM 1.3 mg (NRC200, NRC201)5 .................................... 22nd Century Group, Inc ............................ LNC......... 0.9–1.3
SPECTRUM 2.4 mg (NRC300, NRC301)5 .................................... 22nd Century Group, Inc ............................ LNC......... 1.9–2.4
SPECTRUM 5.2 mg (NRC400, NRC401)5 .................................... 22nd Century Group, Inc ............................ LNC......... 4.6–5.2
SPECTRUM 15.8 mg (NRC600, NRC601)5 .................................. 22nd Century Group, Inc ............................ NNC ........ 15.5–17.3
Ultratech/Lifetech denicotinized6 .................................................... Ultratech Inc./Lifetech Corp ........................ VLNC ...... *0.6–0.7
Ultratech/Lifetech nicotine6 ............................................................. Ultratech Inc./Lifetech Corp ........................ LNC......... *8.0–10.3
Xodus7 ............................................................................................ 22nd Century Ltd., LLC .............................. LNC......... *1.2–1.7
Abbreviations: VLNC: ≤1.0 mg nicotine per gram of total tobacco; LNC: >1.0 mg and <11.4 mg nicotine per gram of total tobacco; NNC: ≥11.4
mg nicotine per gram of total tobacco.
1Nicotine content from (Ref. 31).
2Nicotine content from (Ref. 248).
3Nicotine content from (Refs. 258 and 259).
4Nicotine content from (Ref. 257).
5Nicotine content from (Ref. 29) (supplement).
6Nicotine content estimated by FDA based on nicotine yield data from (Ref. 250).
7Nicotine content from (Ref. 41).
*For these cigarettes, FDA calculated milligrams of nicotine per gram of total tobacco based on reports of milligrams of nicotine per cigarette.
Calculations were based on an estimate of 0.7 grams of tobacco per cigarette.
B. Consumer Knowledge, Attitudes, associated with the behavioral less likely to cause cancer than NNC
Beliefs, and Perceptions Regarding responses consumers believe they cigarettes (Refs. 230, 263 to 265).
VLNC Cigarettes and FDA Regulation of would take if such a policy is in effect. Furthermore, there is evidence that
Levels of Nicotine in Tobacco perceptions about the harms of VLNC
The science on consumer knowledge,
In this section we describe the science attitudes, beliefs, and perceptions about cigarettes relative to NNC cigarettes vary
related to consumer knowledge, RNC cigarettes demonstrates that a by race and age (Refs. 236, 266 to 268).
attitudes, and beliefs about reduced majority of consumers perceive that The science on consumer knowledge,
nicotine content (RNC)21cigarettes and RNC cigarettes are equally or more attitudes, beliefs, and perceptions about
consumers’ perceptions about a harmful than NNC cigarettes. Nationally RNC cigarettes also demonstrates that
hypothetical policy reducing nicotine representative studies suggest that 50 to there are widespread misperceptions
levels in cigarettes and certain 71 percent of consumers perceive RNC about the addictiveness of RNC
combustible tobacco products. These cigarettes to be as or more harmful to cigarettes relative to NNC cigarettes.
concepts are important because they are Studies that use nationally
health than NNC cigarettes, while 25 to
representative surveys report that 60 to
35 percent perceive them to be less
21RNC cigarettes in this context refers to any harmful than NNC cigarettes (Refs. 260 77 percent of consumers incorrectly
cigarette with a lower amount of nicotine than NNC believe that RNC cigarettes are equally
to 262). Recent nationally representative
cigarettes. FDA notes that studies focusing on
or more addictive than NNC cigarettes
consumer perceptions of RNC cigarettes typically findings estimate that between 12 and
do not differentiate between RNC, LNC, and VLNC 25 percent of people who smoke or use (Refs. 260 and 261). Tobacco use status
cigarettes. However, when describing studies that does not appear to significantly change
e-cigarettes believe RNC cigarettes are
focus on consumer behavior and perceptions of misperceptions about the addictiveness
VLNC cigarettes specifically, FDA uses the term less harmful than NNC cigarettes (Refs.
of RNC cigarettes (Ref. 228).
VLNC cigarettes. FDA notes that studies in this 227 and 236). In studies where
domain typically use consumer perceptions of RNC participants actually use VLNC A 2019 nationally representative
cigarettes to form conclusions about consumer
cigarettes, they tend to perceive them as study of consumer support for a policy
perceptions about VLNC cigarettes and FDA’s
proposed reduction of nicotine more broadly. significantly less harmful to health and ‘‘requiring cigarette makers to lower the
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5055
nicotine levels in cigarettes so that they intensity, and duration of use); and the • Pipe tobacco (other than waterpipe
are less addictive’’ reported that 81 potential for migration to different tobacco).
percent of study participants favored the products. These data indicate that FDA has determined that research
policy (52.4 percent strongly favored, reduction of nicotine in cigarettes regarding the public health impacts of
28.6 somewhat favored) and 19 percent would reduce addiction potential, potential maximum nicotine level
opposed the policy (10.3 percent dependence levels, number of cigarettes policies applies across the tobacco
somewhat opposed, 8.7 percent strongly smoked per day, and increase quit products covered under this proposed
opposed) (Ref. 269). However, consumer attempts among people who currently product standard. As discussed in
misperceptions about the harm and smoke cigarettes. In light of these data, greater detail in section VII.B.12 of this
addictiveness of reduced nicotine FDA also expects that reduction of document, given that cigarette tobacco,
content combustible tobacco products nicotine would prevent people who RYO tobacco, and pipe tobacco can be
impact understanding of the purpose of experiment with cigarettes and cigars effectively used in cigarettes, the VLNC
a reduced nicotine product standard. from developing an addiction to tobacco cigarette research discussed in this
For example, respondents in some and progressing to regular tobacco use. proposed rule applies to these products,
studies did not understand why FDA This proposed product standard is and any expected benefits that would
would choose to remove nicotine from intended to address one of our nation’s accrue as a result of instituting the
cigarettes or little cigars and cigarillos greatest public health challenges: the proposed product standard for cigarettes
but not remove other chemicals that are death and disease caused by combusted would also be expected to accrue for
harmful (Ref. 229, 270, and 271). tobacco use. Approximately 480,000 these product categories. FDA also
Respondents also stated that they people die every year from smoking concludes that the VLNC cigarette
believed other chemicals besides cigarettes (Ref. 1 at p. 659) and another research applies to cigars, given the
nicotine make cigarettes addictive, and 9,000 die from smoking cigars (Ref. 1 at similarities between cigarettes and most
that removing nicotine from cigarettes p. 659; Ref. 134). Cigarettes are the cigars (e.g., use topography). For further
would not eliminate their addictiveness tobacco product category that causes the discussion of FDA’s findings that VLNC
(Refs. 229 and 270). Misperceptions may greatest amount of harm to the public cigarette research applies to other
also serve as potential determinants of health as a result of the prevalence of covered products under this proposed
consumer responses to a reduced cigarette use among adults and cigarette product standard, see section VII.B.12 of
nicotine product standard. For example, toxicity and addictiveness. This this document. In addition, as discussed
one study suggests that misperceptions proposed product standard is expected in section VI.A.3 of this document, FDA
among people who smoke regarding the to increase cessation and switching to finds that the non-cigarette combusted
harm of RNC cigarettes is correlated potentially less harmful tobacco products within the proposed scope of
with quit intentions in responses to a products and prevent people who are this rule (i.e., RYO tobacco, cigars, pipe
hypothetical government policy experimenting with use—mainly youth tobacco) could function as acceptable
substitutes for many people who smoke
reducing most of the nicotine in and young adults—from transitioning to
cigarettes while exposing them to
cigarettes (Ref. 267). FDA recognizes the regular use of cigarettes. However, if the
similar risks and toxicity as cigarettes.
importance of addressing consumers’ product standard were only to cover
As discussed in section VIII of this
misperceptions about the relative harm cigarettes, it would likely be less
document, FDA finds that the proposed
and addictiveness of VLNC cigarettes as effective. Specifically, a significant
product standard, with this scope, is
compared to other products. FDA will number of people who are addicted to
appropriate for the protection of the
continue to conduct research (e.g., smoking cigarettes would likely migrate
public health and would provide
assess changes over time in knowledge, to similar combusted tobacco products
substantial benefits for people who
attitudes, and perceptions relative to after the standard went into effect to
currently use cigarettes and certain
tobacco product characteristics maintain their nicotine exposure,
other combusted tobacco products and
including nicotine content) to inform thereby undermining the significant
for people who experiment with
regulatory decisions and other actions. health benefits of the proposed product
cigarettes and cigars and people who do
VI. Rationale for Products Covered by standard (Ref. 5) (see also section VI.B not use such tobacco products. FDA
the Proposed Product Standard of this document for further discussion seeks comments on this proposed scope,
of the potential for non-cigarette
particularly on how it may affect youth
FDA has reviewed and closely
combusted tobacco product switching).
initiation and use of combusted tobacco
considered the comments to the
Therefore, to increase public health
products.
Nicotine ANPRM, as well as additional
benefits, FDA also is proposing to cover
evidence and information not available certain other combusted tobacco A. Prevalence and Abuse Potential of
at the time of the ANPRM, in products in addition to cigarettes. Cigarettes and Other Combusted
developing the scope of products for Tobacco Products
Based on these considerations, FDA is
this proposed product standard.
proposing to cover the following Cigarettes, the most frequently used
Specifically, we considered several
products under this product standard: tobacco products, are the tobacco
factors, such as the strength and breadth
• Cigarettes (other than product category that causes the greatest
of the available data on the likely effects
noncombusted cigarettes, such as HTPs burden of harm to public health given
of reducing nicotine derived from
that meet the definition of a cigarette), that approximately 28 million adults
studies of VLNC cigarettes; current
• Cigarette tobacco, and 380,000 youth currently smoke
prevalence and initiation rates for
different classes of tobacco products; the • RYO tobacco, cigarettes (Ref. 3); the toxicity and
available data on product toxicity, • Cigars (including little cigars, addictiveness of these products; and the
resulting tobacco-related disease and addictiveness, and appeal; product use cigarillos, and large cigars but excluding
death across the population, including topography22(including quantity, premium cigars), and
among people who do not smoke.
Cigarettes are highly addictive and
22Smoking topography measures provide data on smoking, puff volume (i.e., puff size), puff velocity
harmful tobacco products; however, the
various aspects of smoking behavior, including (i.e., puff intensity), puff duration, and inter-puff
number of puffs per cigarette, total time spent interval (i.e., length of time between puffs). other combusted tobacco products
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5056 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
covered in this proposed product White students, 0.9 percent of non- heterosexual men, lifetime rates of daily
standard are similarly addictive and Hispanic Black students, and 1.6 cigarette smoking were significantly
harmful. If the proposed product percent of Hispanic students currently elevated among gay men ages 18–25 (30
standard covered only cigarettes, some smoked cigarettes (Ref. 3). Additionally, percent versus 23 percent) and ages 35–
number of people who smoke cigarettes data from the 2022 NHIS show 49 years (44 percent versus 38 percent)
and are addicted to nicotine would differences in smoking prevalence on (Ref. 277). Similarly, relative to same-
likely migrate to similar combusted the basis of race/ethnicity among adults age heterosexual women, lifetime daily
tobacco products to maintain their (age 18 and over). Specifically, 4.6 cigarette smoking was significantly
nicotine exposure (or engage in dual use percent of non-Hispanic Asian, 8.0 greater among lesbian/gay women ages
with other similar combusted tobacco percent of Hispanic, 12.7 percent of 18–25 (37.7 percent versus 16.3
products), thus reducing the positive non-Hispanic White, 14.2 percent of percent), ages 26–34 (42.2 percent
public health impact of this proposed non-Hispanic Black, 19.3 percent of versus 30.3 percent), and ages 35–49
product standard. non-Hispanic AI/AN, and 11.9 percent (42.7 percent versus 32.6 percent) (Ref.
Regulating the nicotine yield of of non-Hispanic Other participants 277).
cigarettes and certain other combusted reported current cigarette smoking (Ref. As evidenced in a systematic review
tobacco products through setting a 272). Data from the 2005 and 2015 NHIS and meta-analysis (Ref. 280), studies
maximum nicotine level for them would also indicate that the prevalence of have consistently shown a relationship
make these dangerous combusted cigarette smoking has statistically between socioeconomic status and the
products minimally addictive or significantly declined over this time prevalence of cigarette smoking, such
nonaddictive, making cessation easier period for non-Hispanic white, Black, that greater levels of educational
and helping to prevent people who are Asian, and AI/AN adults and Hispanic attainment and greater total family
experimenting with smoking from adults (Ref. 273). income are inversely associated with the
developing nicotine dependence and Data from an analysis of the 2005 and prevalence of smoking. Specifically, in
progressing to regular use. As stated 2015 NHIS indicate that the prevalence 2021 NHIS data, the prevalence of
elsewhere in this document, FDA’s of smoking has declined significantly cigarette smoking was 18.3 percent for
approach in proposing this product over that time period among both adult adults with a low income, 12.3 percent
standard for cigarettes and certain other male and female participants (29.9 and for those with a medium income, and
combusted tobacco products protects 25.2 percent relative decrease, 6.7 percent for those with a high income
public health by reducing combusted respectively) (Ref. 273). Currently, (Ref. 274). Similarly, by and large, there
tobacco product use (and therefore according to data from the 2022 NHIS, is an inverse relationship between
reducing exposure to harmful toxicants smoking remains more prevalent among educational attainment and the
created through combustion) by making males (13.2 percent) as compared to prevalence of smoking. For instance,
it considerably easier for people who females (10.0 percent) in the United according to the 2021 NHIS, the
want to quit cigarette use to quit all States (Ref. 272). prevalence of smoking was 20.1 percent
tobacco products or switch to Study findings indicate that among adults with some high school
potentially less harmful, noncombusted individuals who identify as lesbian, gay, education but no degree, 30.7 percent
tobacco products which remain or bisexual are more likely to report among persons with a general
available. Therefore, to increase the smoking cigarettes as compared to those equivalency degree, 17.1 percent among
public health benefits, FDA is focusing who identify as heterosexual (Refs. 274 those with a high school diploma, 13.7
this proposed rule on nicotine levels in to 277). Among adults in the 2022 NHIS, percent among persons with an
cigarettes and certain other combusted cigarette smoking among persons associate’s degree, 5.3 percent among
tobacco products because combusted identifying as lesbian, gay, and bisexual those with an undergraduate degree,
products are responsible for the majority was 12.8 percent and among those and 3.2 percent among persons who had
of death and disease due to tobacco use. identifying as heterosexual/straight it received a graduate degree (Ref. 274).
was 11.6 percent (Ref. 272), and The prevalence of cigarette smoking is
1. Cigarettes
smoking was more prevalent among also higher among adults with mental
Data from the 2024 NYTS indicate youth identifying as lesbian, gay, and health symptoms or substance use
that 1.7 percent of high school students bisexual (7.0 percent) in the 2020 NYTS disorder (Refs. 281 to 284). Findings
(approximately 250,000) and 1.1 percent than among those ‘‘not sure’’ of their from the 2022 NHIS show that 27.2
of middle school students sexual identity (3.5 percent) or youth percent of persons reporting severe
(approximately 120,000) reported identifying as heterosexual (2.7 percent) generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
current use of cigarettes (i.e., smoked at (Ref. 275). Current tobacco use for currently smoke cigarettes, as compared
least once during the past 30 days) (Ref. lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender with 10.1 percent who report no or
3). In addition, 11.6 percent of adults youth in the 2022 NYTS was reported minimal GAD (Ref. 272). Similarly, 27.1
reported that they currently smoked for ‘‘any’’ tobacco use (i.e., current use percent of adults who report severe
cigarettes in 2022 (i.e., smoked at least of one or more of the following: e- depression currently smoke cigarettes,
100 cigarettes during their lifetime and cigarettes, cigarettes, cigars, smokeless versus 10.1 percent among those who
now smoke cigarettes every day or some tobacco, hookah, HTPs, nicotine report no or minimal depression (Ref.
days); this means an estimated 28.8 pouches, pipe tobacco, or bidis), but not 281). Additionally, findings from the
million adults in the United States for individual tobacco products (Ref. 2021 NHIS show that 28.1 percent of
currently smoke cigarettes (Ref. 4). 278). Pooled data from the 2015 to 2019 persons reporting serious psychological
Although cigarette smoking is present in NSDUH indicate that compared to distress also reported smoking
all population groups in the United heterosexual/straight respondents, cigarettes, compared to 10.9 percent of
States, the prevalence of cigarette use respondents who identified as gay persons not reporting serious
differs based on sociodemographic males, lesbian/gay females, or bisexual psychological distress (Ref. 274).
characteristics. females reported higher prevalence of Analyses of data from the 2015 NSDUH
Findings from the 2024 NYTS show past 30-day smoking (Ref. 279). for individuals aged 12 years and over
that, among middle and high school Additionally, in data from the 2015/ also show that cigarette smoking is
students, 1.4 percent of non-Hispanic 2016 NSDUH, relative to same-age significantly more prevalent among
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5057
persons who use cannabis (daily among sexual minority males) (Ref. increase their risk of poor health
cannabis use: 54.6 percent; nondaily 288), and youth with disabilities (7.0 outcomes as well as addiction (Refs. 53
cannabis use: 40.2 percent) as compared percent among those who reported and 163). Even if people who smoke
to those who do not use cannabis (15.1 using little cigars and 2.6 percent among cigars do not breathe or inhale smoke
percent) (Ref. 282). An analysis of 2016 those who reported using large cigars) into their lungs, they are still subject to
NSDUH data indicates that cigarette (Ref. 289). Cigar smoking also occurs nicotine’s addictive effects through
smoking is more than twice as prevalent disproportionately among specific buccal (oral) absorption of nicotine or
among persons with alcohol use populations of adults as well, with nicotine absorption through the lips due
disorder, as compared to those without greater prevalence of cigar smoking to cigar tobacco’s alkalinity, as well as
(37.8 percent versus 16.3 percent) (Ref. reported among non-Hispanic Black other harmful health effects (Refs. 55,
283), while data from the 2014 NSDUH adults (5.1 percent) (Ref. 274), 56, 302 and 303). Cigar smoke dissolves
show that the prevalence of cigarette individuals of lower educational in saliva and makes it possible for
smoking is also more than twice as high attainment and lower annual household people who smoke cigars to absorb
among persons with mental health and/ income (Refs. 290 and 291), and sufficient amounts of nicotine to create
or substance use problems than among LGBTQI+ adults (Refs. 292 to 296). dependence even if the user does not
persons without (38.5 percent versus Additionally, when comparing data inhale (Ref. 56).
15.4 percent) (Ref. 284). from 2011 to 2019, while past month Nicotine can exist in protonated and
cigarette smoking and cigar use were
2. Cigars freebase (unprotonated) forms. In the
both statistically significantly lower in
freebase form, it is most addictive
Cigar smoke contains many of the young adults (ages 18–25), the absolute
because it is readily absorbed by the
same constituents as cigarette smoke, and relative declines in cigar use were
buccal mucosa, respiratory tissues, skin,
including nicotine, many of which can less than the declines in cigarette use
and the gastrointestinal tract (Refs. 28
cause significant harm to those who use (33.5 percent in 2011 to 17.5 percent in
and 57). Freebase nicotine amounts are
cigars (Ref. 53). According to the 2024 2019 for cigarettes; 10.9 percent in 2011
generally higher in cigars than cigarettes
NYTS, 330,000 middle and high school to 7.7 percent in 2019 for cigars) (Ref.
due to the higher pH of cigar smoke
students,23including 1.5 percent (an 286). For adults (ages 26 or older),
(Ref. 53). Nicotine absorbed across the
estimated 230,000) of high school cigarette use in 2011 was statistically
buccal mucosa, the mouth’s membrane
students (grades 9–12) and 0.8 percent significantly higher compared to in
lining, can provide sustained amounts
(an estimated 80,000) of middle school 2019; however, cigar use remained
of freebase nicotine to the person using
students (grades 6–8), had smoked a relatively stable and did not
the tobacco product (Ref. 53). Cigars can
cigar (cigar, cigarillo, or little cigar) on significantly change (21.9 percent in
deliver nicotine much like chewing
at least 1 day during the past 30 days 2011 to 18.2 percent in 2019 for
tobacco or oral snuff, with nicotine
(Ref. 3). Overall, the prevalence of cigar cigarettes; 4.2 percent in 2011 to 4.0
extraction absorbed directly through the
smoking among middle and high school percent in 2019 for cigars) (Ref. 286).
buccal mucosa and lips (Ref. 53).
students is comparable to the The 2023 NSDUH found that among
A 1998 NCI Monograph chapter (NCI
prevalence of cigarette smoking, with adults ages 26 or older in 2019, 1,847
Monograph 9) on cigar pharmacology
1.7 percent (an estimated 250,000) of individuals initiated cigar use each day,
and abuse potential concluded that the
high school students and 1.1 percent (an considerably more than the 282 who
nicotine delivery characteristics and
estimated 120,000) of middle school initiated cigarette smoking each day in
daily patterns of smoking among people
students having smoked cigarettes on at that year (Ref. 86).
least 1 day during the past 30 days (Ref. While these data indicate a high who smoke cigars indicate that cigars
3). Cigars are also a popular tobacco burden of current cigar smoking, the produce dependence (Refs. 53 and 164).
product among adults. In the 2022 true prevalence of cigar use is likely Since the publication of NCI Monograph
NHIS, 3.7 percent of adults aged 18 or higher. Little cigars often closely 9, several in-person laboratory studies,
older reported currently using cigars resemble cigarettes, given their shape, where participants use products under
some or every day, behind cigarettes size, filters, and packaging, and are observation and have outcome measures
(11.6 percent) and e-cigarettes (6.0 perceived by many as being healthier assessed, have provided additional
percent) (Ref. 272). than cigarettes (Refs. 297 and 298). evidence to support that nicotine
Evidence from national surveys— Several studies have shown that youth exposure from cigar smoking is
including the Monitoring the Future tend to underreport cigar smoking if sufficient to create or sustain nicotine
study and NSDUH—indicate that, brand name identifiers are not provided dependence among people who use
similar to cigarettes, cigar use has been (Refs. 299 to 301). For example, in one cigars. Through cigar smoke, nicotine
on the decline among U.S. youth and study of Virginia high school students, can be absorbed by inhalation (like
adults in recent years (Refs. 285 to 287). the reported prevalence of cigar use cigarettes) or through the buccal mucosa
However, among youth, this decrease nearly doubled after accounting for (like smokeless tobacco). Multiple
has not been equitably experienced. The students who reported smoking Black & studies found that people who smoke
popularity of cigar use is Mild (a brand name of cigarillos); in the cigars inhale (as evidenced by carbon
disproportionately high among groups original survey results, more than half of monoxide (CO) levels and smoking
such as lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth the students who used Black & Mild topography) and that plasma nicotine
and young adults (3.2 percent among cigarillos did not report using cigars, levels are similar to those of people who
transgender youth, 3.2 percent among cigarillos, or little cigars (Ref. 299). smoke cigarettes (Refs. 304 to 308).
sexual minority females, and 3.9 percent Research indicates that most people Furthermore, using the Questionnaire of
who smoke cigars unknowingly inhale Smoking Urges, a commonly used
some amount of smoke, including measure of tobacco craving, several 23The weighted population estimate reported in
the scientific publication is 500,000 students. As people who smoke cigars who report studies found that cigars reduce craving
noted in the scientific publication, overall that they do not inhale (Refs. 54 and 55). and urge to smoke to a similar
population estimates might not sum to Youth more commonly use cigarillos magnitude as cigarettes (Refs. 306 to
corresponding population estimates because of
and little filtered cigars that are 308). Cigars have also been shown to
rounding or inclusion of students who did not self-
report sex, race and ethnicity, or grade level. designed to be inhaled, which may decrease acute nicotine withdrawal
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5058 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
symptoms (e.g., craving, anxiousness) engaging in RYO use for financial noncombusted tobacco product may
(Ref. 304). reasons (Ref. 319). Studies of RYO sustain their nicotine dependence and
Several additional studies have used tobacco use among youth are limited, may significantly reduce their risk of
epidemiological data to compare but prevalence of RYO tobacco use tobacco-related death and disease to the
nicotine dependence levels among among U.S. middle and high school extent that the products they switch to
people who use multiple tobacco students in the 2012 NYTS was 3.4 result in less harm. That is, while
products (i.e., poly tobacco use), people percent (Ref. 320). dependence on any tobacco product
who exclusively use cigarettes, and The lack of data on RYO and pipe remains a health concern, nicotine alone
people who exclusively use cigars (Refs. tobacco use and the limitations in how is not directly responsible for tobacco-
309 to 311). The data show that a national surveys assess loose tobacco related cancer, lung disease, and heart
significant proportion of people who use impact our ability to draw disease (Ref. 323). Switching completely
exclusively use cigars display conclusions regarding appeal of loose to a noncombusted tobacco product
characteristics of tobacco dependence tobacco among youth and adults at this would reduce exposure to the chemical
such as craving (Ref. 309); however, time. However, if such products were constituents created through
people who use multiple tobacco not included within the scope of this combustion, which are the primary
products and people who exclusively proposed product standard, some contributors of combusted tobacco-
use cigarettes showed the highest levels number of people who smoke cigarettes related harm (Refs. 28 and 324).
of dependence, followed by people who and/or cigars and are addicted to However, as discussed throughout
exclusively use cigars (Refs. 309 to 311). nicotine would likely easily migrate to this document, if a nicotine tobacco
such products to maintain their nicotine product standard were to apply to
3. Loose Tobacco (Pipe and RYO
exposure given that RYO and pipe cigarettes only, it likely would have
Tobacco)
tobacco have the same addictive substantially less impact on improving
Laboratory and survey studies have properties and health consequences as health outcomes for people who use
provided evidence to conclude that factory-made cigarettes (Refs. 168 and tobacco products. Specifically, FDA
RYO and pipe tobacco smoking is 321). For example, more people who expects that, to maintain their nicotine
sufficient to create or sustain nicotine smoke cigarettes could use RYO or pipe exposure, some people who smoke
dependence among people who use tobacco to make NNC cigarettes (or cigarettes and are addicted to nicotine
RYO or pipe tobacco (Ref. 312). Studies engage in dual use with certain other would likely migrate to other combusted
show that people who use RYO and combusted tobacco products), reducing tobacco products (or begin to engage in
pipe tobacco inhale (as evidenced by the positive public health impact of this dual use with such other products) with
smoking topography) (Refs. 312 to 314) proposed product standard (see section similar toxicological risks after such a
and plasma nicotine levels are similar to VI.B.1 of this document) (Ref. 322). cigarette-only standard was in effect.
those of people who smoke factory- Taken together, these data FDA also would expect that people who
made cigarettes (Ref. 313). Furthermore, demonstrate that if FDA did not include use non-cigarette combusted tobacco
RYO tobacco reduces craving and urge certain other combusted tobacco products would continue their existing
to smoke at a similar magnitude and is products within the scope of this use patterns, thereby maintaining their
rated similarly with regard to subjective proposed product standard, many risk of tobacco-related death and
appeal as factory-made cigarettes (Ref. people who smoke cigarettes likely disease. To ensure maximum benefits
313). Evidence also suggests that RYO would migrate to, or increase use of, for this nicotine tobacco product
tobacco is at least as harmful to health such other tobacco products in an standard, FDA is proposing that it apply
as factory-made cigarettes (Refs. 315 to attempt to replace or supplement the to cigarettes and certain other
318). reduction of nicotine in their VLNC combusted tobacco products.
According to data from the 2024 cigarettes.
1. Tobacco Product Switching in
NYTS, 0.5 percent of high school B. Potential for Non-Cigarette Behavioral Intention and Clinical
students (or approximately 70,000 Combusted Tobacco Product Switching Studies
students) reported using pipe tobacco
Nicotine can be delivered through Studies involving people who
within the previous 30 days and 0.5
products that represent a continuum of currently use cigarettes predict a range
percent of middle school students (or
risk, with combusted tobacco products of tobacco use behaviors in response to
approximately 50,000 students) reported
at the most harmful end of this a nicotine product standard. When
pipe tobacco use in the prior 30 days
continuum. FDA’s approach in presented with a hypothetical nicotine
(Ref. 3). Data from the 2021 NHIS
proposing this product standard for reduction policy, most people who use
indicated that 0.9 percent of adults ages
cigarettes and certain other combusted cigarettes report that they would
18 and older (or approximately 2.3
tobacco products protects public health continue to smoke VLNC cigarettes or
million adults) currently used pipes
by reducing combusted tobacco product use other combusted tobacco products,
(Ref. 274). However, FDA notes that
use (and therefore reducing exposure to or that they would quit; only a small
pipe tobacco prevalence data are likely
harmful toxicants created through portion report that they would consider
an underestimate, as the NIHS survey
combustion) while potentially less switching to a noncombusted tobacco
does not include the number of people
harmful, noncombusted tobacco product (Refs. 262 and 264). One
who use pipe tobacco to roll their own
products remain available for people experimental study using a nationally
cigarettes.24There is also evidence that
who have not quit all tobacco products. representative sample examined the
young adults who smoke cigarettes are
FDA expects that, if this proposed rule intended behaviors of people who
is finalized and a nicotine product currently smoke cigarettes if a nicotine
24People who smoke RYO and pipe tobacco are
standard for cigarettes and certain other product standard were put in place; susceptible to similar negative health consequences
as people who smoke traditional cigarettes. While combusted tobacco products is in place, overall, 30.5 percent of the participants
there is a paucity of research examining RYO and many people who smoke cigarettes will intended to quit using all tobacco
pipe tobacco use, FDA is not aware of any data either quit smoking or switch to a products, 5.8 percent intended to switch
indicating that RYO cigarettes or pipe tobacco are
noncombusted tobacco product. Those to noncombusted tobacco products, and
associated with fewer adverse health consequences
than traditional cigarettes. who switch completely to use of a 61.0 percent indicated they would
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5059
smoke VLNC cigarettes or other containing products (i.e., smokeless likely switch from combusted tobacco
combusted tobacco products (Ref. 262). tobacco, ENDS, NRT, cigars, cigarillos) product use to potentially less harmful
An in-depth qualitative study assigned and smoking behavior in 136 people tobacco products. For further discussion
a small number of people who use who smoked cigarettes and were of switching to a potentially less
cigarettes to use VLNC cigarettes for 5 unwilling to quit randomly assigned harmful nicotine delivery product, see
days, then examined their intended participants to one of three conditions section VIII.D.3 of this document.
behaviors in response to a nicotine and instructed them to use only study-
2. Cigarette Price Increases
product standard (Ref. 264). Most assigned tobacco products for 8 weeks
participants reported that if a product (Ref. 5). The ‘‘LNC1’’ group received Studies investigating the effects of
standard was put in place, they would LNC cigarettes combined with changes in cigarette prices on product
use VLNC cigarettes if they were the noncombusted tobacco products (i.e., substitution may also be used as an
only cigarettes available, and a few said smokeless tobacco, ENDS, NRT) and indicator of potential product switching
that they would use VLNC cigarettes to combusted non-cigarette tobacco in response to the proposed nicotine
reduce their smoking over time to products (i.e., cigars, cigarillos), the tobacco product standard, because a
eventually quit. Some participants ‘‘LNC2’’ group received LNC cigarettes reduction in nicotine content could be
discussed the possibility of switching to combined with only noncombusted conceptualized as an increase in the
ENDS or other combusted products if a tobacco products, and the NNC cigarette unit price of nicotine, as the cost to
product standard was put in place. Self- group received NNC cigarettes consumers is increased per unit of
reported intentions to use tobacco combined with noncombusted and nicotine (Ref. 332). Therefore, studies
products are a useful predictor of combusted non-cigarette products. assessing cigarette taxation may be
individuals’ future tobacco use behavior Participants who received LNC useful because they are assessing the
(Refs. 325 and 326) and these two cigarettes (both the LNC1 and LNC2 influence of changes in the unit price of
studies support FDA assessments of the groups) used more alternative cigarettes, through increases in cost, on
likelihood of switching in response to combusted tobacco products and more behavior among people who use the
the nicotine product standard. noncombusted tobacco products (the products. Price increases, including
In clinical studies that investigated taxation, represent one of the most
LNC2 group) than participants in the
the effects of VLNC cigarettes, effective tobacco control policies
NNC cigarette group. However, these
researchers typically instructed associated with significant declines in
participants also smoked fewer total
participants assigned to VLNC cigarette overall tobacco consumption as well as
combusted tobacco products and had
groups to use only study-provided reductions in youth initiation rates (Ref.
more quit attempts than participants in
cigarettes (i.e., to refrain from using 333). However, taxation and price
the NNC cigarette group. The findings
usual brand cigarettes or other tobacco increases are also associated with a
from this study demonstrate that when
products during experimental range of tax avoidance behaviors, such
people who smoke cigarettes are
conditions). Noncompliance with these as substitution with a less expensive
switched to LNC cigarettes and
instructions during a clinical trial may product, purchasing from low or
provided with alternative sources of
also indicate the likelihood that people untaxed sources, or purchasing in bulk
nicotine, they will readily use the
who smoke VLNC cigarettes would use (Ref. 334), and this behavior is more
alternative sources of nicotine.
alternative nicotine-containing products likely to occur among people who
Moreover, the LNC cigarette group (the
if a nicotine product standard is smoke and are of lower socioeconomic
LNC2 group) that had access to
implemented. Several studies reviewed status (Ref. 335). It is this potential
noncombusted nicotine sources only
in this document assessed biochemical substitution that FDA is seeking to
(i.e., smokeless tobacco, ENDS, NRT)
or self-reported measures of VLNC mitigate by proposing to cover certain
had statistically significantly lower
cigarette noncompliance (i.e., ongoing other combusted tobacco products in
biomarker levels of certain harmful
NNC cigarette or other tobacco product addition to cigarettes. FDA expects that
constituents (N-Nitrosonornicotine
use) and showed high levels of by reducing the nicotine in cigarettes
(NNN) and NNAL) than those who
noncompliance with smoking only and certain other combusted tobacco
continued to smoke NNC cigarettes and
VLNC cigarettes during the study. Since products through this proposed product
had access to noncombusted and
participants were provided with VLNC standard, the effect on people who
combusted non-cigarette products (the
cigarettes at no cost and continued to smoke will be similar to increasing the
LNC1 group) (Ref. 5). The NNN and
use non-study provided tobacco price, and, as is seen in examples of
NNAL biomarker levels in the LNC1
products (particularly NNC cigarettes), taxation and price increases, people
group with access to both combusted
these data suggest that VLNC cigarettes who smoke would likely turn to
and noncombusted tobacco products
have lower appeal and abuse potential alternative sources of nicotine.
compared to NNC cigarettes (Refs. 327 resembled the NNC group (Ref. 5). An epidemiological study used data
to 331). These findings suggest that once Taken together, these findings suggest from the 2001 and 2002 New Jersey
a nicotine product standard covering that if the proposed product standard Adult Tobacco Survey (NJATS) to
solely cigarettes is in place and VLNC reduces the nicotine level in cigarettes determine whether people who smoke
cigarettes are the only cigarettes only, but people who smoke cigarettes cigarettes switched to cigars following
available, people are likely to use still have access to other NNC an increase in the state cigarette excise
alternative nicotine-containing products combusted tobacco products, they likely tax (U.S. $0.80 to U.S. $1.50 per pack)
including other combusted products. would substitute with the NNC (Ref. 336). In 2001, the cigarette
However, if cigarettes and certain other combusted tobacco products. This smoking prevalence in New Jersey was
combusted products are covered by a behavior would negate a significant 22.1 percent. Following a large cigarette
product standard, people who use proportion of the public health impact excise tax increase, the cigarette
combusted products are likely to use of the product standard. If other prevalence decreased to 18 percent (Ref.
non-combusted products, therefore combusted tobacco products also are 336). There were no statistically
benefitting public health. covered by this proposed product significant differences in the cigar
A clinical study conducted to standard, however, data suggest that smoking prevalence between 2001 and
compare the use of alternative nicotine- people who smoke cigarettes would 2002; however, ever cigar use increased
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5060 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
statistically significantly for people who covered cigarettes only), which would cigarettes resulted in an 18.6 percent
currently smoked cigarettes (50.9 reduce the rule’s potential public health increase in e-cigarette demand, showing
percent versus 60.3 percent, effects. If cigarettes were the only that e-cigarettes substituted for
respectively) and increased slightly for product covered by the proposed cigarettes (Ref. 347). Although, in this
people who recently quit smoking (48.4 product standard, a proportion of study, large cigars, smokeless tobacco,
percent versus 56.4 percent, people who smoke cigarettes would and loose smoking tobacco were not
respectively). In 2001, people who likely to turn to certain other combusted associated with increased use in
currently smoked cigarettes had the products, thereby reducing the response to increasing cigarette prices,
highest prevalence of current cigar use significant public health impact of this Nielsen retail sales data that were
(13.9 percent), while people who had rule. Similarly, people who use certain analyzed in another study showed that
recently quit cigarette use had the other combusted products would not be little cigars, RYO tobacco, and pipe
lowest prevalence (2.6 percent). In affected by the reduction in nicotine in tobacco each serve as substitutes for
contrast, in 2002, while people who cigarettes and would also not benefit. cigarettes (Ref. 346).
currently smoked cigarettes again Further, if cigarettes were the only Studies have also used hypothetical
reported the greatest prevalence of product covered by the proposed purchase tasks to investigate responses
current cigar use (13.2 percent), people product standard, the negative health by people who smoke cigarettes to
who had recently quit cigarette smoking effects of second- and thirdhand smoke potential tobacco policy changes or
had the second highest prevalence of from these other combusted products price increases (Refs. 348 and 349). One
current cigar use (11.1 percent). The would still affect other non-smoking study used a simulated tobacco
authors concluded that after a cigarette individuals exposed to these combusted marketplace to measure purchasing
excise tax increase, a small but notable products. However, if these certain behaviors among people who smoke
proportion of people who had recently other combusted products are covered, cigarettes (Ref. 349). Participants could
quit cigarette smoking tried cigars, then the alternative products for those purchase cigarettes, e-cigarettes,
substituted cigars for cigarettes, or who switch (instead of quitting) likely cigarillos, gum, dip, lozenges, and snus.
continued using combusted tobacco would not be combusted, therefore When cigarette prices increased, e-
products in the form of cigars (Ref. 336). benefitting public health. cigarette purchasing statistically
significantly increased (Ref. 349). A
Additional indirect evidence assessing 3. Behavioral Economics Data
study conducted in the Netherlands
trends in internet searches following the
Behavioral economics utilizes utilized a similar hypothetical tobacco
2009 U.S. Federal tobacco tax increase
principles of psychology and economics marketplace to investigate hypothetical
showed that after the tax was
to predict purchasing behavior as a purchases for VLNC cigarettes as a
announced, search queries increased for
function of different market constraints function of varying scenarios (Ref. 348).
both combusted and noncombusted
(Ref. 341). Several studies have used Most relevant was the scenario where
non-cigarette tobacco products (Ref.
real or hypothetical scenarios to participants made hypothetical
337).
investigate the impact of a change in purchases for VLNC cigarettes, e-
Similarly, several studies assessed price or availability of a given tobacco cigarettes, and NRT in a marketplace
changes in loose tobacco sales following product on subsequent purchasing or where NNC cigarettes were unavailable.
a large tax increase in RYO tobacco and use of another tobacco product. VLNC cigarettes had the highest rate of
found decreases in RYO tobacco sales Purchasing behaviors observed in purchase, followed by e-cigarettes, and
and increases in pipe tobacco sales as behavioral economics studies have been then NRT. Approximately 20 percent of
soon as the tax rate changed (Refs. 322, shown to be concordant with actual participants reported that they would
338 to 340). Researchers analyzing tobacco consumption and real purchase not purchase any of the products if NNC
publicly available Federal excise tax estimates (Refs. 342 to 344). cigarettes were unavailable (Ref. 348).
data from 2000 to 2015 found that total Studies have used retail sales data to These data demonstrate that people
RYO tobacco sales statistically investigate tobacco substitution as a who smoke cigarettes are willing to shift
significantly decreased by 70.0 percent; function of price (Refs. 345 to 347). One consumption toward both
however, total pipe tobacco sales study investigated relationships noncombusted and combusted non-
increased by 556.4 percent (Ref. 340). between purchasing patterns and price cigarette tobacco products in times of
Another study found a similar increase of cigarettes and little cigars. In 2013, a economic or product constraint.
in pipe tobacco sales and decrease in pack of little cigars was approximately Moreover, this evidence supports the
RYO tobacco sales in response to tax 32 to 37 percent less expensive than a conclusion that many people who
differences between the products; pack of cigarettes (Ref. 345). A 10 smoke cigarettes likely would switch to
however, self-reported pipe tobacco use, percent increase in the price of little other combusted tobacco products that
assessed via the NSDUH, remained cigars was associated with a 31.7 contain nicotine if a nicotine product
consistent, and RYO consumption percent decrease in per capita little cigar standard covered only cigarettes. Of
increased (Ref. 338). The authors sales, while a 10 percent increase in the additional concern is the potential for
suggested that people who smoke price of cigarettes was associated with a increased combusted non-cigarette
cigarettes may have bought loose 27.3 percent increase in per capita little tobacco product substitution among
tobacco labeled as pipe tobacco for use cigar sales. The authors concluded that certain populations that may be price
as RYO cigarettes as a tax avoidance people who smoke cigarettes are price sensitive, such as individuals with low
strategy. These data suggest that sensitive and avoided the higher cost of socioeconomic status compared to those
following the implementation of a new cigarettes by switching to little cigars. with higher socioeconomic status (Ref.
tobacco control policy, manufacturers Another study estimated demand for 335). One study showed that
may modify their products and a cigarettes, little cigars/cigarillos, large individuals of low socioeconomic status
significant proportion of consumers may cigars, e-cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, are 85 percent more likely to report
modify their behavior to adapt to the and loose tobacco using Nielsen’s using discount brands/RYO compared
changes (e.g., switching to a similar Convenience Track retail scanner to participants with higher
combusted tobacco product if a final database (Ref. 347). In this study, a 10 socioeconomic status (SES) in order to
nicotine tobacco product standard percent increase in the price of avoid an increase in the cost of their
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5061
preferred product, combusted cigarettes, tobacco product, and it cannot be machine smoking method, CI smoking
and therefore, these individuals have a manipulated by user behavior. method, FTC smoking method) through
history of and comfort with switching to Setting a limit on nicotine content a variety of design changes to the
alternative combusted products when and measuring that content is more cigarette, including the use of
available at a lower cost (Ref. 335). effective in reducing yield (i.e., the ventilation holes—although the actual
Given that the research highlighted amount of nicotine the user is exposed nicotine content of the tobacco filler
above has shown that a change in the to) than setting a limit based on a direct was not low. These design changes led
availability of a tobacco product measurement of yield under to lower tar and nicotine yields in
influences subsequent purchasing or use standardized smoking-machine machine-generated smoke, and
of other tobacco products, FDA is protocols. This is because the way yield therefore, these products were labeled
concerned that if the proposed nicotine is measured by smoking machines does and marketed as low nicotine yield or
product standard is limited to cigarettes, not accurately capture the amount of ‘‘light,’’ ‘‘low,’’ or ‘‘mild’’ cigarettes.
a large portion of individuals will seek nicotine that is taken in by a person However, often unconsciously cigarette
out alternative sources of nicotine by using the tobacco products. For users could and did modify their use
using other combusted tobacco products example, manufacturers have developed behaviors to compensate for these
if those products are not included ‘‘low-yield’’ cigarettes designed to design changes and extract more
within the scope of this rule. markedly reduce yield results as nicotine from the products compared to
measured by the Federal Trade
the machine-generated yields, often to
VII. Discussion of Nicotine-Related Commission (FTC) testing method (Ref.
levels comparable to conventional
Topics 350). They decreased yields by
cigarettes. For example, cigarette makers
A. Approach To Limiting User Exposure manipulating various characteristics of generally design cigarettes with
to Nicotine the cigarettes (e.g., decreasing the length ventilation holes far enough down the
of the available tobacco column,
Nicotine is the primary addictive cigarette that they are not blocked
increasing the burn rate of the column,
constituent in all tobacco products, during the FTC smoking test, but are
increasing filter efficiency, increasing
including cigarettes. FDA is proposing a easily blocked by users’ fingers or
air dilution in mainstream smoke,
tobacco product standard that would mouths, and larger or more frequent
decreasing density of tobacco, or
limit nicotine yield by establishing a puffs could be taken by consumers (Ref.
changing the concentration of nicotine
maximum nicotine level in cigarettes 351). Through such compensatory
in the tobacco) (Ref. 350 at Table 2–2).
and certain other combusted tobacco smoking behaviors, cigarette users were
Many of these design changes led to the
products to make these products amount of nicotine measured in the able to overcome the changes in
minimally addictive or nonaddictive, machine-generated yield being different ventilation in these products, resulting
using the best available science to from—and less than—the amount of in no benefit to public health (Ref. 350).
determine a level that is appropriate for nicotine received by the smoker (Ref. There is ample research demonstrating
the protection of the public health. 350). This disconnect is a result of that people who use ventilated
After consideration of the scientific smoking compensatory behaviors, such cigarettes change their smoking
literature, comments submitted in as smoking more cigarettes per day, behavior to increase their smoke intake,
response to the Nicotine ANPRM, and increasing the number of puffs (with a including taking larger puffs, inhaling
the measured levels of nicotine content smoker’s last few puffs on a cigarette more deeply, taking more frequent
in research cigarettes (as reported in the delivering disproportionately more puffs, or increasing the number of
literature, as well as in information nicotine than delivered in a smoking cigarettes they smoke per day25(Refs.
submitted to FDA from industry), FDA machine’s standardized number of 350 to 361). As a result, evidence shows
is proposing that the maximum nicotine puffs), increasing puff volume and that many people are exposed to higher
level in cigarettes and certain other frequency, inhaling more deeply, and yields of smoke constituents, including
combusted tobacco products not exceed covering ventilation holes with fingers nicotine, than the yields estimated by
0.70 mg of nicotine content per gram of or lips, that enable smokers to standardized smoking machine methods
total tobacco in order to limit user overcome, intentionally or (Refs. 362 to 364). Further, researchers
exposure to nicotine. unintentionally, many of these design have reviewed the extensive body of
Nicotine ‘‘yield’’ is the amount of changes and, thereby, increase the literature on filter ventilation and health
nicotine in smoke, in other words, the amount of their nicotine intake effects and concluded that there is
amount of nicotine to which a smoker compared to the machine-generated strong evidence to suggest that filter
potentially is exposed. Nicotine yield is yield. They often do this to obtain ventilation has contributed to the rise in
measured by a machine-generated adequate nicotine to satisfy their lung adenocarcinomas among people
protocol where the product is smoked nicotine cravings (Ref. 350). who smoke (Ref. 365). Studies that
by a machine in a prescribed manner While standardized smoking machine measure nicotine pharmacokinetics
and the smoke is collected in order to puffing regimes in a controlled have also found that the relative
measure nicotine with another laboratory environment are effective in percentage of free nicotine in smoke
instrument, such as a gas producing reproducible measurements may increase with percent of filter
chromatograph. Nicotine content refers of nicotine yield, as noted above, human ventilation (Ref. 366), which suggests
to the total amount of nicotine present behavior—how people smoke, including that greater filter ventilation may expose
in the tobacco filler and is typically in response to cigarette-design smokers to greater free nicotine levels
conveyed as either milligrams of features—influences the nicotine intake that can lead to greater total nicotine
nicotine per gram of total tobacco or from a cigarette and can overcome exposure while smoking as this form of
milligrams of nicotine per product. The features of a cigarette that lowered the nicotine is more easily absorbed by the
nicotine content of a tobacco product machine-generated nicotine yield. For body.
serves as a ceiling on nicotine yield, as example, combusted cigarettes that were
it denotes the maximum amount of once referred to as ‘‘light’’ cigarettes
25See section VII.B 4., Smoking Topography, of
nicotine that a user can be exposed to achieved a reduction in machine-
this document for further discussion of
when they smoke the cigarette or other measured nicotine yield (e.g., ISO compensatory smoking and VLNC cigarettes.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5062 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
In contrast, reducing the nicotine comments, data, and research regarding Cigarettes).27The natural variation of
content in cigarettes and certain other this proposed maximum nicotine level. this agricultural product resulted in the
combusted tobacco products places an slight variation in the nicotine content
1. Origin of the Proposed Product
absolute maximum limit on the amount of the tobacco filler within the
Standard
of nicotine that can be extracted (i.e., company’s internal range of acceptable
yielded) by the user. VLNC cigarettes, in In 1994, Benowitz and Henningfield values. The average value and range
contrast to low nicotine yield cigarettes proposed the idea of Federal regulation were compiled by the company from 9
generated by other design changes, are of nicotine content in combusted years of sampling data of the genetically
associated with minimal and transient tobacco products to a level too low to engineered tobacco that was used to
compensatory smoking because people sustain addiction (Ref. 367). They make SPECTRUM and Quest cigarettes.
who smoke these cigarettes are unable considered the smoking habits of a It is likely that the cigarettes used
to obtain adequate amounts of nicotine small population of people who smoke throughout the scientific literature,
through these behaviors; therefore, they cigarettes intermittently and who reported as having 0.4 mg nicotine per
stop trying to do so. In sum, limiting demonstrate reduced nicotine gram of total tobacco, may have, in
nicotine yield through a maximum dependence (a group sometimes referred actuality, been between 0.4 and 0.7 mg
nicotine content level would be more to as tobacco ‘‘chippers’’) to inform of nicotine per gram of total tobacco.
effective in achieving the public health indirect estimates of a nicotine level This range is consistent with the
benefits that come from reducing the that they proposed would be too low to scientific evidence to support a
amount of the nicotine to which a user sustain addiction in most people who minimally addictive or nonaddictive
is exposed than would setting a limit smoke cigarettes. Chippers are typically level of nicotine content in cigarettes
based on a measurement of the characterized by smoking five or fewer and certain other combusted tobacco
maximum yield of tobacco products.26 CPD, with limited or no withdrawal products, and FDA took these data from
symptoms, and by being able to skip 22nd Century Group Inc.’s VLNC
B. Scientific Evidence Supports the smoking for days at a time (Ref. 368). cigarettes into consideration when
Target Level of Nicotine Based on their estimates of nicotine determining the appropriate, technically
Many studies have investigated the exposure among chippers, the feasible maximum level of nicotine
effects of VLNC cigarettes on behavioral researchers proposed a level of nicotine content to propose in this product
outcomes, including smoking cessation, per cigarette—approximately 0.5 mg of standard.
use behaviors, biomarkers of exposure, nicotine per cigarette—that should be 2. Smoking Cessation
and physiological effects. Findings from low enough to prevent or limit the
A number of studies investigated the
these studies are discussed in this development of nicotine addiction in
effects of VLNC or LNC cigarettes alone
section, and they suggest that most young people. The nicotine level
or in combination with NRT on smoking
individuals who smoke VLNC cigarettes proposed by Benowitz and Henningfield
cessation among people who smoke but
with nicotine levels similar to what was an initial estimation based on
are interested in quitting (Refs. 32, 35,
FDA is proposing here are more likely observational data, and there is
41, 369 to 373) and those uninterested
to make a quit attempt, reduce smoking, individual variability in dose sensitivity
in quitting (Refs. 31, 40, 258, and 374).
demonstrate reduced exposure to to all addictive substances; however, the
As stated throughout this document,
harmful and potentially harmful initial estimate posed by Benowitz and
most adults who use tobacco products
constituents (HPHCs), and demonstrate Henningfield paved the way for
wish to quit but are unsuccessful
similar or reduced physiological subsequent prospective clinical studies
because of the highly addictive nature of
responses to cigarettes relative to designed to evaluate the addiction
these products (Refs. 1, 13, 28, 58, and
individuals who smoke usual brand or potential of VLNC cigarettes.
61) (see section IV.A of this document
NNC cigarettes. Results from these and Several brands of commercial and
for a discussion of the addictiveness of
other studies suggest that switching to research cigarettes were manufactured
nicotine). Taken together, results from
VLNC cigarettes does not lead to to contain a nicotine content similar to
these studies demonstrate that people
compensatory smoking (see this section that originally proposed by Benowitz
who smoke and are interested in
and VII.B.4 of this document for further and Henningfield (see table 1 of this
quitting who are given VLNC cigarettes
discussion of compensatory smoking). document). Using these cigarettes,
are more likely to achieve initial
researchers have consistently
Therefore, the data reported in the smoking abstinence compared to those
demonstrated that VLNC cigarettes have
scientific literature support a tobacco who continue to smoke their usual
reduced addiction potential compared
product standard limiting nicotine yield brand or NNC cigarettes. In addition,
to NNC cigarettes.
by setting a maximum nicotine content provision of NRT and/or behavioral
22nd Century Group Inc., the
level in cigarettes and certain other intervention with VLNC cigarettes may
company that developed SPECTRUM
combusted tobacco products to a further increase smoking cessation
Nicotine Research Cigarettes and whose
maximum of 0.70 mg of nicotine per among individuals interested in quitting
genetically engineered tobacco was used
gram of total tobacco. FDA believes that (Ref. 19).
to make Quest cigarettes, submitted
this maximum nicotine level would Research demonstrates the benefits of
modified risk tobacco product
provide the appropriate flexibility to VLNC cigarettes for those people who
applications to FDA that reported that
account for variations in tobacco smoke and are interested in quitting. In
the actual average value of nicotine
growing seasons and variations in one of the clinical trials that has
content in its genetically engineered
analytical testing. FDA requests examined the effects of VLNC cigarettes
VLNC tobacco is 0.6 mg nicotine per
gram of total tobacco, with a range of 0.4 26Consistent with the proposed limit on nicotine 27On December 23, 2021, FDA issued exposure
to 0.7 mg nicotine per gram of total
content, FDA is also proposing testing for nicotine modification orders to 22nd Century Group Inc. for
content only, rather than both content and yield. tobacco (see section V.A of this VLN King and VLN Menthol King combusted,
This testing requirement is less burdensome yet still document for a discussion of the history filtered cigarettes. See https://www.fda.gov/tobacco-
effective in measuring the maximum nicotine yield, of LNC and VLNC cigarettes, including products/advertising-and-promotion/22nd-century-
i.e., the maximum amount of nicotine to which a group-inc-modified-risk-tobacco-product-mrtp-
the SPECTRUM Nicotine Research
user can be exposed. applications.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5063
alone on smoking cessation in people usual quitline care (33 percent) reduced nicotine content cigarettes over
who smoke cigarettes who were compared to the group who received a period of 6 months, beginning with
interested in quitting, 165 people who usual quitline care alone (28 percent). NNC cigarettes and ending with VLNC
smoke were randomized to use LNC Continuous abstinence rates at month 6 cigarettes (Refs. 258 and 374). In the
cigarettes, VLNC cigarettes, or 4 mg also were statistically significantly first study, a statistically significantly
nicotine lozenges for 6 weeks (Ref. 32). higher for participants who received greater proportion of participants who
While there were no statistically VLNC cigarettes with usual quitline care received VLNC cigarettes considered
significant differences between groups (23 percent) compared to those who quitting at the end of the study,
in CO-verified point prevalence received usual quitline care alone (15 compared to those in a control group
abstinence (i.e., quit) rates at 1–4-week percent). Likewise, in another study, 98 who smoked their usual brand cigarettes
followup visits, abstinence rates at the persons who reported heavy smoking throughout the study (Ref. 258). In a
week 6 followup visit were statistically (i.e., greater than or equal to 20 CPD) followup study in which a subset of
significantly higher in the VLNC received either VLNC cigarettes and a 21 participants was followed for 2 years,
cigarette group (47.2 percent) and mg nicotine patch or NNC cigarettes for cotinine levels in the gradual nicotine
nicotine lozenge group (36.7 percent) 2 weeks prior to quitting (Ref. 372). reduction group rose to baseline levels
relative to the LNC cigarette group (23.1 After the quit date, all study or levels similar to those of the control
percent) (Ref. 32). In another participants wore nicotine patches for group after 12 months during which
randomized clinical trial (RCT), 346 up to 8 weeks. Participants who smoked both groups could freely smoke usual
people who smoked and were interested VLNC cigarettes and received patches brand cigarettes (Ref. 374). Although 7.5
in quitting were randomized to receive reported less frequent and less intense percent of participants in the gradual
6 weeks of (1) a combination of VLNC cravings during the 2 weeks before and reduction group quit smoking,
cigarettes (nicotine was gradually after the quit date, suggesting that use of compared to only 2 percent of
reduced from NNC to LNC to VLNC VLNC cigarettes plus NRT may aid in participants in the usual brand control
cigarettes every 2 weeks) and nicotine cessation by reducing cigarette craving group, this difference was not
patch (VLNC cigarettes + NRT); (2) during a quit attempt. Participants in statistically significant (Ref. 374). In
VLNC cigarettes and a placebo patch the VLNC cigarettes + NRT group had a another study, 33 participants were
(VLNC cigarettes only); or (3) NNC higher self-reported quit rate compared randomized to receive VLNC cigarettes
cigarettes and NRT after their quit date to those in the NNC cigarettes + NRT or to continue to smoke their usual
(NNC cigarettes + NRT) (Ref. 369). group at 3 months (43 percent vs. 34 brand cigarettes for 12 weeks (Ref. 31).
Following their quit date at week 7, the percent, respectively) and 6 months (28 The availability of VLNC cigarettes
VLNC cigarettes + NRT group continued percent vs. 21 percent, respectively), but increased quit attempts in people who
to receive NRT, the VLNC cigarettes smoked cigarettes and had no intention
these quit rates did not differ
only group received placebo patches, of quitting (Ref. 31).
statistically significantly between
and the NNC cigarettes + NRT group Furthermore, several extended
groups, likely due to a small sample size
was provided with NRT during weeks duration VLNC studies demonstrated
precluding sufficient statistical power.
7–10. Biochemically confirmed how VLNC cigarettes can increase
Several other studies have
continuous abstinence rates were 32.8 cessation by assessing self-reported quit
investigated the effects of VLNC or LNC
percent in the VLNC cigarettes + NRT attempts as a secondary study aim.
cigarettes on smoking cessation among
group, 16.4 percent in the VLNC While one study showed no statistically
individuals uninterested in quitting
cigarettes only group, and 21.9 percent significant differences in quit rates
(Refs. 31, 40, 258 and 374). In an RCT,
in the NNC cigarettes + NRT group (Ref. among people who smoke cigarettes on
participants received either NNC
369), suggesting that the combination of a nondaily basis who used VLNC or
cigarettes or VLNC cigarettes (double-
VLNC cigarettes and NRT is more NNC cigarettes for 10 weeks (Ref. 377),
effective at promoting continuous blinded, i.e., neither the participants nor other studies showed that participants
abstinence than VLNC cigarettes alone. the researchers knew which type of who smoked VLNC cigarettes were more
However, abstinence at 3- and 6-month cigarette participants received), and likely to report a quit attempt after 6
followups could not be adequately either received or did not receive a weeks of use (Ref. 29) and had a greater
assessed due to attrition (Ref. 369). transdermal nicotine patch (open-label, number of cigarette-free days after 12
Many other studies conducted in i.e., participants and researchers were (Ref. 378) and 18 weeks (Ref. 379)
individuals interested in quitting aware of whether participants received compared to those who smoked NNC
investigated the effects of LNC or VLNC NRT) for 7 weeks. At week 7, cigarettes. However, a secondary
cigarettes combined with NRT (Refs. 41, participants were provided a daily analysis of the 18 week study (Ref. 379)
35, 371 to 373, and 375). For example, descending monetary bonus for found that there were no significant
in a study conducted in New Zealand, refraining from using any cigarettes. differences in quit rates or intention to
1,410 callers to a quitline were Participants randomized to receive NRT quit at the 6-month followup timepoint
randomized to receive VLNC cigarettes were encouraged to continue using their (Ref. 380).
with usual quitline care (8 weeks of patches. Although participants who Among the studies evaluating
NRT and behavioral support via a received VLNC cigarettes smoked smoking cessation following VLNC
quitline) or usual care alone (Ref. 373). statistically significantly fewer total cigarette use, few utilized a randomized
Six months after the quit date, 7-day CPD than participants who received controlled trial design, and results were
point-prevalence abstinence rates28 NNC cigarettes, during the abstinence sometimes inconsistent, particularly
were statistically significantly greater in period, no groups differed statistically related to long-term followup. However,
participants using VLNC cigarettes with significantly from the NNC cigarette- the weight of evidence from these
only group in time to lapse or number studies suggests that among people who
28Seven-day point prevalence abstinence is a of days abstinent; however, these results smoke and are interested in quitting,
measure of, in this case, tobacco cessation outcomes were likely influenced by low using VLNC cigarettes can facilitate
for quitlines. At a given point in time (in this case, adherence to VLNC cigarette use in this initial smoking abstinence, particularly
6 months after the quit date), study participants are
study (Ref. 376). In another series of when used along with NRT and/or
asked whether they have used cigarettes or other
forms of tobacco in the past 7 days. studies, participants received gradually behavioral intervention. Among people
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5064 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
who smoke but are uninterested in to VLNC cigarettes (i.e., gradual versus that by the end of the four night stays
quitting, VLNC cigarette use did not immediate reduction in nicotine the number of cigarettes participants
increase quit rates; however, it did content). Despite these differences in smoked did not differ statistically
increase quit attempts. It is important to study methods and participant significantly between the NNC and
note that studies evaluating smoking characteristics, nearly all the studies VLNC cigarette groups, indicating that
cessation following VLNC cigarette use came to a similar conclusion: relative to people who smoke may not engage in
took place in an environment where usual brand or NNC cigarette compensatory smoking behavior when
NNC cigarettes and other combusted conditions, CPD was similar (i.e., there only VLNC cigarettes are available (Ref.
tobacco products remained readily was no compensatory smoking) (Refs.31, 388). Another study compared the
available. For this reason, the available 35, 329, 369, 374, 381 to 385,) or lower effects of VLNC and NNC cigarettes on
data likely underestimates the in VLNC cigarette conditions (Refs. 29, CPD in people who smoke who
likelihood of increased cessation rates 32, 41, 265, 386, and 387). Notably, inhabited a residential research facility
following the implementation of a studies that found lower CPD while throughout the study. The results
nicotine product standard because NNC participants smoked VLNC cigarettes showed that when participants had
cigarettes would no longer be available, tended to have larger sample sizes (Refs. access to only VLNC cigarettes for 11
making relapse to these cigarettes no 29 and 379), which may have had more days, they smoked statistically
longer possible. statistical power to detect relatively significantly fewer CPD than those who
small but consistent differences in CPD had access to only NNC cigarettes (Ref.
3. Cigarettes Per Day (CPD)
across conditions. 64).
One concern raised by some with Taken together, these studies indicate
One limitation of some studies that
regard to a reduced nicotine policy is that extended use of VLNC cigarettes
examined the effects of VLNC cigarette
whether people who smoke might alter does not produce increases in CPD in an
smoking on CPD is that comparisons
their smoking behavior by smoking attempt to compensate for the reduced
between VLNC CPD and usual brand or
additional cigarettes in order to attempt nicotine levels. FDA expects that this
NNC CPD were made without taking
to compensate for the lower amounts of may result in reductions in CPD among
into account the number of non-study
nicotine, but studies show that extended people who do not quit, particularly in
cigarettes smoked per day in
use of VLNC cigarettes does not produce an environment where NNC cigarettes
experimental conditions. A measure of
increases in CPD. Researchers typically are not legally available.
‘‘total CPD’’ in VLNC cigarette
assess CPD via participant self-reporting
conditions would include the number of 4. Smoking Topography
or by counting cigarette filters or packs
returned by participants. By measuring study-assigned VLNC cigarettes plus the Smoking topography refers to various
CPD during an extended exposure trial, number of usual brand or non-study aspects of smoking behavior, including
researchers can determine whether cigarettes smoked by participants who number of puffs per cigarette, total time
switching to VLNC cigarettes produces were not fully compliant with study spent smoking, puff volume (i.e., puff
changes in CPD compared to usual procedures. Few studies have compared size), puff velocity (i.e., puff intensity),
brand or NNC cigarette conditions. total CPD across VLNC and usual brand puff duration, and inter-puff interval
Research conducted in the absence of or NNC cigarette conditions. However, (i.e., length of time between puffs).
the proposed standard shows that one study found that, relative to usual Although some of these outcomes (e.g.,
switching to LNC or VLNC cigarettes brand and NNC cigarette conditions, the puffs per cigarette) can be measured via
can produce modest decreases in CPD. combination of study- and non-study- direct observation, smoking topography
However, as noted previously, studies assigned CPD was lower in VLNC and is typically assessed with an electronic
evaluating changes in CPD following LNC cigarette conditions when nicotine puff topography unit attached directly
VLNC cigarette use took place in an content was less than or equal to 2.4 mg to a cigarette. Smoking topography
environment where NNC cigarettes and nicotine per gram of total tobacco, and measures that indicate more intense
other combusted tobacco products that those participants who used VLNC smoking behavior may be attributed to
remained readily available, likely cigarettes (i.e., 0.4 mg nicotine per gram compensatory smoking. A concern
underestimating the potential of total tobacco), demonstrated reduced raised by some with regard to a nicotine
reductions in CPD following use and dependence with minimal reduction policy is whether people who
implementation of a nicotine product evidence of withdrawal-related smoke might engage in compensatory
standard because NNC cigarettes and discomfort or safety concerns (Ref. 29). smoking behavior to try to extract more
other combusted tobacco products Another study found that fewer nicotine from the cigarettes, thus
would no longer be legally available. combusted tobacco products were increasing exposure to tobacco-related
These findings suggest that, if the smoked during LNC cigarette conditions toxicants. Smoking topography study
proposed product standard were relative to an NNC cigarette condition results are mixed, but the majority of
finalized and implemented, people who (Ref. 5). A study where participants studies show that individuals who
smoke VLNC cigarettes would not were confined to a hotel in order to smoke VLNC cigarettes demonstrate no
increase CPD to compensate for reduced limit their access to non-study products statistically significant differences in
nicotine exposure, and FDA expects that assessed the potential effects of VLNC smoking topography relative to those
for many CPD would decrease over cigarettes on compensatory smoking who smoke usual brand or NNC
time. behaviors (Ref. 388). Participants cigarettes, or they demonstrate changes
Many studies measured VLNC CPD completed two 4-night stays; during in smoking topography measures that
under conditions of extended exposure their first stay, they were randomized to are associated with reductions in
(e.g., several consecutive weeks or receive either NNC or VLNC cigarettes tobacco smoke exposure (e.g., lower
longer). These studies varied in sample and were randomized to the other group total puff volume) rather than increased
size, duration of exposure, average CPD during their second stay. Furthermore, compensatory smoking.
requirements to enter the study, participants were given an ‘‘account Some studies found no differences in
participants’ intentions to quit smoking, balance’’ where they could purchase smoking topography between VLNC and
and the method in which participants study cigarettes from a ‘‘cigarette store’’ NNC or usual brand cigarette conditions
transitioned from usual brand cigarettes during the study. Investigators found (Refs. 389 to 391). However, many other
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5065
studies found that smoking topography exposure (Ref. 402) and decreased would smoke fewer cigarettes even if
differed between cigarette conditions. positive subjective effects compared to the cigarettes were free, spend less for
Some of the more reliable findings NNC and usual brand cigarettes (Ref. the VLNC cigarettes, and quit smoking
replicated across studies were the 391), these data indicate lower abuse VLNC cigarettes at a lower price point
effects of VLNC cigarettes on total puff potential of VLNC cigarettes. However, (i.e., a price point at which participants
volume and number of puffs per research has also shown that the choice would continue to pay for NNC
cigarette. Under conditions of both brief between VLNC and NNC cigarettes can cigarettes). Responses on the
(e.g., several hours) and extended (e.g., be influenced by factors such as cost or hypothetical choice task were highly
several weeks) exposure, studies found effort, such that when the effort required correlated with the actual number of
that total puff volume was lower (Refs. to obtain NNC cigarettes increases, some cigarettes smoked during week 6 of the
29, 34, 383, 384, and 392) and number people who smoke cigarettes will switch study.
of puffs per cigarette was lower (Refs. their preference from NNC cigarettes to Hypothetical choice tasks can also be
329, 384, 392, and 393) when VLNC cigarettes (Ref. 398). For example, used to investigate the substitutability of
participants smoked VLNC cigarettes, one laboratory study investigating tobacco products. For example, another
relative to usual brand or NNC tobacco product choice when study employed a cross-price elasticity
cigarettes. However, two brief exposure participants were provided with an task in which the price of VLNC
studies showed higher puff volumes experimental income found that, cigarettes was held constant while the
(Refs. 393 and 394) and puff duration although participants rated VLNC price for usual brand cigarettes was
(Ref. 394) when participants smoked cigarettes as less satisfying than both manipulated (Ref. 404). When usual
VLNC cigarettes in short laboratory LNC and NNC cigarettes, they brand cigarette price increased, demand
sessions. Another brief exposure study purchased statistically significantly for VLNC cigarettes increased and
conducted in adolescents showed that more puffs of the VLNC cigarettes when demand for usual brand cigarettes
VLNC cigarettes produced higher LNC and NNC cigarettes were more decreased, indicating that VLNC
numbers of puffs relative to NNC expensive (Ref. 403). Thus, if the cigarettes are a partial substitute for
cigarettes; however, additional measures proposed product standard is usual brand cigarettes (Ref. 404).
were not collected to determine whether implemented and the cost, effort, or risk Rather than directly assessing choice
this was a transient or lasting effect (Ref. associated with obtaining NNC between tobacco products, some studies
395). An extended exposure study cigarettes increases, individual evaluate how much people who smoke
showed initial decreases in puff volume preference may shift to VLNC cigarettes are willing to work to earn puffs from
when participants smoked VLNC or more readily available tobacco cigarettes when the number of responses
cigarettes relative to NNC cigarettes, but products rather than attempting to seek required to earn a puff progressively
these differences dissipated over the increases (i.e., a progressive ratio task).
out illicitly marketed NNC products. If
course of 7 days (Ref. 383). Finally, One study that used this method found
the proposed product standard were to
limited evidence suggests that VLNC that participants assigned to an NNC
apply only to cigarettes, these findings
cigarettes are smoked faster (Refs. 259 cigarette group were willing to work
also indicate that people who smoke
and 396), are smoked with increased statistically significantly harder to earn
cigarettes who do not quit after a final
peak velocity (Ref. 384) and may puffs from their NNC cigarette than
rule goes into effect would likely be
decrease inter-puff intervals when participants assigned to a VLNC
willing to switch to other NNC
compared to NNC cigarettes (Ref. 392). cigarette group, indicating greater abuse
combusted tobacco products rather than
In all, while smoking topography liability (i.e., ability to promote
using VLNC cigarettes. If this were the
study results are mixed, the majority of continued use and the development of
case, the public health benefit of the
studies show that individuals who dependence) of the NNC cigarette (Ref.
proposed product standard would be
smoke VLNC cigarettes demonstrate no 64).
reduced.
statistically significant differences in These studies demonstrate that VLNC
smoking topography relative to those Hypothetical choice tasks (e.g., cigarettes are consistently shown to be
who smoke usual brand or NNC cigarette purchase task, multiple choice of lower abuse potential compared to
cigarettes, or they demonstrate changes questionnaire) are used to characterize NNC cigarettes, as evidenced by
in smoking topography measures that reinforcing efficacy by determining how responses to behavioral and
are associated with reductions in changes in the cost of a commodity hypothetical choice procedures.
tobacco smoke exposure (e.g., lower affect its consumption. These tasks Behavioral and hypothetical choice
total puff volume) rather than increased typically involve prior experience with research has also shown that the choice
compensatory smoking. the product or brief laboratory exposure, between VLNC and NNC cigarettes can
followed by a series of questions asking be influenced such that some people
5. Abuse Potential participants to either (1) report how will switch their preference from NNC
Abuse potential refers to the ability of many cigarettes they would consume at cigarettes to VLNC cigarettes when the
a product to promote continued use and a variety of escalating prices; or (2) price or effort required to obtain the
the development of dependence. Choice choose between cigarettes or money at products increases. See section VI.B of
studies are commonly used to measure a variety of prices. Studies that used this document for further discussion on
abuse potential, where preference for hypothetical choice tasks to assess the impact of cigarette price on
one tobacco product over another VLNC cigarette reinforcement showed switching behavior.
indicates greater abuse potential. When that participants find VLNC cigarettes to
6. Biomarkers of Exposure
participants are asked to make a real or be less reinforcing than NNC cigarettes
hypothetical choice between VLNC (Refs. 265, 343, and 391). In one study, Research demonstrates that, following
cigarettes and NNC cigarettes in the reinforcing efficacy of cigarettes VLNC cigarette use, some biomarkers of
research studies, they reliably choose varying in nicotine content following 6 exposure (e.g., CO, measured as breath
NNC cigarettes (Refs. 391, 397 to 401). weeks of access to the products was CO or carboxyhemoglobin (COHb)) are
Combined with data showing that VLNC examined (Ref. 343). Compared to the typically similar to those observed
cigarettes are associated with NNC cigarette group, those in the VLNC following NNC cigarette use, while
significantly lower plasma nicotine cigarette group estimated that they other biomarkers (e.g., total nicotine
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5066 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
equivalents (TNE), which are a controlled laboratory conditions found participants who smoked cigarettes
combination of nicotine, cotinine, and increases in breath CO following VLNC daily (Ref. 402). While each of the four
other nicotine metabolites collected cigarette use relative to NNC cigarette cigarettes produced statistically
through plasma, saliva, or urine) are use (Refs. 419 and 420). In addition, an significant increases in plasma nicotine
typically lower following VLNC extended exposure study (over the boost (i.e., peak plasma nicotine level
cigarette use. However, no biomarkers of course of 35 days) showed that CO minus baseline level) after smoking, the
exposure are reliably observed to be levels initially increased when VLNC and LNC cigarettes had
higher following VLNC cigarette use participants switched from usual brand statistically significantly lower plasma
relative to NNC cigarette use, meaning cigarettes during baseline to VLNC nicotine boost and AUC 0–120 (i.e.,
that study participants are not engaging cigarettes; however, these effects plasma nicotine area under the curve
in compensatory smoking behaviors. dissipated over time as CO levels calculated for the first 120 minutes
Some of the most commonly eventually returned to baseline levels following product use, indicating extent
measured biomarkers of tobacco smoke (Ref. 384). As discussed in section of exposure to nicotine and its clearance
exposure are CO, plasma nicotine, VIII.D.7 of this document, these limited rate from the body) compared to the
cotinine (collected through plasma, increases in CO exposure may be due to NNC and usual brand cigarettes. These
saliva, or urine), TNE, and other HPHCs changes in smoking topography. At least data show that although VLNC
or their metabolites (e.g., NNN, NNAL, one extended exposure study found cigarettes are associated with
Benzo[a]pyrene (BAP), 3-hydroxypropyl decreases in CO boost (the difference significantly lower nicotine uptake
mercapturic acid (3–HPMA), S- between measured CO levels before and compared to NNC and usual brand
phenylmercapturic acid (S–PMA)). after smoking a cigarette) after VLNC cigarettes, the cigarettes still deliver a
While nicotine and its metabolites cigarette use compared to usual brand measurable amount of nicotine.
would be expected to decrease in cigarettes (Ref. 329). In another study, The effects of VLNC cigarette
individuals who switch from NNC to one group of participants smoked NNC exposure on other HPHCs were less
VLNC cigarettes, other biomarkers of cigarettes throughout the study, a reliable across studies. Nevertheless,
exposure would be expected to remain studies consistently found that VLNC
second group smoked study cigarettes
the same if smoking behavior remained cigarette exposure either reduced or did
with gradually reduced nicotine
unchanged. Thus, any changes in not change exposure to NNN, NNAL,
contents, and a third group immediately
biomarker levels observed between NNC urinary 1-hydroxypyrene, or BAP
switched to VLNC cigarettes (Ref. 421).
and VLNC cigarette conditions in relative to NNC or usual brand cigarettes
This study found that subjects in the
clinical studies may indicate differences (Refs. 5, 29, 32, 40, 258, 382, 384, and
immediate VLNC cigarette group had
in smoking behavior (e.g., changes in 329). Two studies also examined 3–
statistically significantly lower CO than
CPD or smoking topography) between HPMA and S–PMA levels and found
did the NNC cigarette or gradual
these two groups. Notably, due to the that these biomarkers decreased in
reduction groups. Breath CO for
short half-lives of some biomarkers (e.g., VLNC cigarette conditions compared to
participants in the NNC cigarette and
breath CO), decreases in smoking can LNC and NNC cigarette conditions (Ref.
gradual reduction groups did not differ
produce decreases in these biomarkers 32). Another study found that an
statistically significantly from each
during brief exposure studies. However, immediate switch to VLNC cigarettes
other (Ref. 421). Moreover, the only
decreases in smoking may not produce statistically significantly reduced
study to date that examined the effects
decreases in some biomarkers (e.g., exposure to acrolein and phenanthrene
of VLNC cigarettes on breath CO in
NNAL) under such conditions due to tetraol (both are biomarkers of smoke
people who smoke who inhabited a
the prolonged half-lives of these exposure) throughout a 20-week study
residential research facility found that
biomarkers. duration compared to a gradual
when participants only had access to
Most studies have found no reduction approach (Ref. 379). The
study cigarettes for 11 days, those who
differences in CO exposure between reductions in biomarkers that were
were assigned VLNC cigarettes had
participants who smoke VLNC cigarettes observed in some of these studies
statistically significantly lower breath
and those who smoke usual brand or following VLNC cigarette exposure were
CO than those who were assigned NNC
NNC cigarettes (Refs. 5, 29, 32, 34, 40, typically correlated with decreases in
cigarettes. Furthermore, these
258, 374, 376, 383, 387, 388, 390, 391, CPD or other smoking behaviors. Thus,
differences increased over the course of
393, 395, 396, 402, 405 to 417,). This as expected, VLNC cigarette use resulted
each day such that they were much
finding may be somewhat unexpected as in fewer CPD, which resulted in overall
larger in the afternoon than in the
many studies have found that reductions in HPHC exposure.
morning (Ref. 64).
participants smoke fewer CPD when Importantly, none of the studies found
they smoke VLNC cigarettes relative to Notwithstanding the differing CO that VLNC cigarette use resulted in
NNC or usual brand cigarettes. studies, studies that examined nicotine, increases in any of these other HPHCs
However, although CO is positively cotinine, or TNE levels had or their biomarkers. Taken together,
associated with CPD, research has overwhelming concurrence regarding these studies support that VLNC
shown that the correlation may only be the effects of either brief or extended cigarette use is associated with
of moderate strength (Ref. 418). exposure to VLNC cigarettes compared biomarker exposure that is similar to or
Furthermore, CO may be impacted by to usual brand or NNC cigarettes. VLNC lower than NNC cigarette use.
noncompliance with study cigarettes cigarette use resulted in substantially
7. Physiological Effects
(see section VI.B of this document for a lower levels of nicotine, cotinine, and
discussion about noncompliance). TNE than usual brand or NNC cigarettes Physiological measures may be proxy
Nevertheless, differences were (Refs. 5, 29, 32 to 34, 40, 258, 329, 370, measures for the stimulant effects of
observed between VLNC and NNC 374, 376, 382 to 384, 387, 388, 390, 402, nicotine. Pharmacodynamic effects of
cigarette conditions in a few studies. 403, 406, 407, 410, 413, 417, and 419 to nicotine include central and peripheral
Two brief exposure studies in which 425). One within-subjects laboratory nervous system stimulation, arousal,
participants were given limited access study compared the nicotine and increased heart rate or blood
to reduced nicotine content cigarettes pharmacokinetic profile of VLNC, LNC, pressure. Nicotine is a known stimulant,
over the course of several hours under NNC, and usual brand cigarettes in 12 but physiological effects may occur in
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00036 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5067
response to combusted tobacco products Taken together, findings from these however, nAChR receptor occupancy
even in the absence of nicotine in those studies suggest that VLNC cigarettes and the magnitude of craving and
who regularly use cigarettes and certain produce physiological responses that withdrawal responses observed
other combusted tobacco products due are similar to or less pronounced than following use of VLNC cigarettes are not
to behavioral conditioning or other those produced by NNC cigarettes. as high as those following use of NNC
psychoactive chemicals in tobacco These data suggest that the nicotine in cigarettes.
smoke. Data show that physiological the VLNC cigarettes is able to elicit
9. Dependence
effects related to VLNC cigarettes are physiological responses in people who
similar or less pronounced than those smoke cigarettes, although a portion of Combusted tobacco product use can
produced by NNC cigarettes, suggesting the response may also be due to lead to symptoms of nicotine
that the nicotine in the VLNC cigarettes sensorimotor cues, or other stimuli dependence, which may include
is able to produce physiological effects. associated with smoking, that may have tolerance to the effects of nicotine,
There is slight variability in the data conditioned participants to produce withdrawal upon cessation of use,
assessing the physiological effects of these physiological effects due to the craving, and unsuccessful efforts to quit
VLNC cigarettes. Some studies show historical repeated pairings with smoking. Because dependence may take
that, regardless of nicotine content, nicotine. time to develop or change, it is often
acute cigarette smoking is associated measured under conditions of extended
8. Neurological Effects
with an increase in baseline heart rate exposure. Studies typically assess
(Refs. 259, 407, 411, and 419); however, The main target of nicotine in the dependence with questionnaires,
these increases were either less central nervous system is the nicotinic including the Fagerstro¨m Test for
pronounced following VLNC cigarette acetylcholine receptor (nAChR). Nicotine Dependence (FTND),
use compared to NNC cigarette use Positron emission tomography (PET) Fagerstro¨m Test for Cigarette
(Refs. 259 and 407) or were less and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) Dependence (FTCD), Nicotine
consistent (i.e., observed at some but not data obtained from humans who smoke Dependence Syndrome Scale (NDSS),
all time points following use) (Ref. 411). using an nAChR-specific radiotracer and Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking
Some research has shown that indicates that after smoking a VLNC Dependence Motives (WISDM).
escalations in heart rate dissipate after cigarette, nAChR receptors located in Although some studies found no
repeated exposure to VLNC cigarettes numerous areas of the brain are evidence of a change in dependence
but not usual brand cigarettes (Ref. 407). occupied despite the lower nicotine when the nicotine content of cigarettes
In contrast, other studies did not content of VLNC cigarettes (Ref. 430). was gradually reduced, most studies
observe increases in heart rate when Nicotine also activates the found evidence indicating that
participants smoked VLNC cigarettes dopaminergic brain reward system, switching to VLNC cigarettes decreases
(Refs. 250, 413, 417, and 426), and which results in dopamine release and dependence. Moreover, the evidence
several studies showed statistically a pleasure response. The release of suggests that immediate nicotine
significantly reduced escalations in dopamine also initiates an adaptive reduction is more likely to lead to
heart rate compared to acute LNC, NNC, process in which an individual forms decreases in dependence than gradual
or usual brand cigarette administration learned associations between the reduction. These findings support the
(Refs. 64, 249, 265, 390, 405, 415, 427, subjective state (e.g., pleasure) and the hypothesis that lowering the nicotine
and 428). object or context that led to that state levels in cigarettes and certain other
Some studies also investigated the (e.g., the act of smoking a cigarette) (Ref. combusted tobacco products would
effects of VLNC cigarettes on blood 389). Through this process, both reduce nicotine exposure and, thereby,
pressure. Several studies found no nicotine administration and smoking nicotine dependence in people who do
differences in blood pressure after stimuli (e.g., a cigarette, a lighter) not to switch to another nicotine-
smoking a VLNC cigarette compared to contribute to the cycle of nicotine containing tobacco product.
an LNC cigarette (Refs. 249 and 419), dependence (Ref. 38). Smoking NNC In studies that gradually reduced the
NNC cigarette (Ref. 259), or usual brand cigarettes to satiety results in near- nicotine content of cigarettes over the
cigarette (Refs. 249, 259, and 419). complete occupancy of nAChRs in the course of weeks or months, the effects
However, other studies showed brain (Refs. 431 and 432). In contrast, of VLNC cigarettes on dependence were
statistically significantly greater although studies have shown there is somewhat mixed. In a study wherein
increases in blood pressure after enough nicotine in VLNC cigarettes to nicotine content was gradually reduced
smoking NNC or usual brand cigarettes bind to nAChRs in the brain (Ref. 430) (using NNC, LNC, and VLNC cigarettes)
relative to VLNC cigarettes (Refs. 265 and to release dopamine (Ref. 389), over the course of 4 weeks, there was a
and 390). results from these studies have also trend towards statistical significance
A small number of studies examined shown the effects are smaller than those (i.e., if more participants had been
the effects of VLNC cigarettes on skin observed from smoking NNC cigarettes. tested, the results may have become
temperature and skin conductance (a These differences in nAChR occupancy statistically significant) in overall
measure of sympathetic nervous system and dopamine release between VLNC reduction of dependence scores across
activity indicating psychological or and NNC cigarettes may explain, in part, conditions (Ref. 329). Another gradual
physiological arousal). Although one why many studies have shown smoking reduction study found no difference in
study showed that skin temperature VLNC cigarettes does not consistently dependence when comparing data from
decreased to a greater extent with NNC produce the same magnitude of baseline to week 26 in 135 participants
cigarettes compared to VLNC cigarettes subjective craving and withdrawal who smoked either gradually reduced
(Ref. 259), another study found no responses observed following use of nicotine content cigarettes over the
differences in skin temperature as a NNC cigarettes (Refs. 398, 406, 407, 411, course of 6 months or their own brand
function of nicotine content in cigarettes 413, 415, 417, 419, 422, 433 to 439). cigarettes for the same duration (Ref.
(Ref. 426). Another study found no Taken together, these findings 258). However, when comparing only
statistically significant differences in demonstrate that nicotine from smoking data from week 14 to week 26, while
skin conductance between VLNC and VLNC cigarettes binds to nAChRs participants were primarily smoking
NNC cigarettes (Ref. 429). located in numerous areas of the brain; VLNC cigarettes, there was a statistically
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00037 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5068 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
significant decrease in dependence in differences in dependence scores were 265, 383, 398, 399, 403, 410, 413, 428,
the group that received gradually observed between the gradual reduction 435, 437, 440, 442 to 448). However, a
reduced nicotine content cigarettes (Ref. and control groups. These results few studies found no statistically
258). A secondary analysis of data from suggest that immediate nicotine significant differences in ‘‘liking’’ as a
51 people who smoke demonstrated that reduction is associated with reduced function of nicotine content in cigarettes
participants with higher FTND scores at nicotine dependence compared to (Refs. 415, 419, 420, and 449). Many
baseline were more likely to gradual reduction or continued use of studies also have evaluated other
demonstrate signs of dependence during NNC cigarettes (Ref. 379). subjective effects (such as ‘‘good’’ or
the study, regardless of the nicotine The delay to smoking the first ‘‘positive’’ effects and ‘‘bad’’ or
content of their study cigarettes (Ref. cigarette of the day is a strong predictor ‘‘negative’’ effects) and found that they
381). In a followup study, participants of dependence. In the only study to date vary together with drug ‘‘liking.’’ A
assigned to receive gradually reduced that examined the effects of VLNC number of studies have shown that
nicotine content cigarettes were given cigarettes on latency (i.e., delay) to VLNC cigarettes were rated lower on
VLNC cigarettes for an additional 6 smoke in participants inhabiting a other positive subjective effects items
months, and no statistically significant residential research facility, time to first (e.g., ‘‘satisfaction,’’ ‘‘pleasure,’’ ‘‘taste,’’
changes in dependence were observed cigarette was statistically significantly ‘‘strength,’’ ‘‘stimulation’’) compared to
(Ref. 374). longer among people who smoke who LNC cigarettes (Refs. 265, 412, 419, and
In studies that immediately reduced only had access to VLNC cigarettes for 450), NNC cigarettes (Refs.265, 394, 396,
the nicotine content of cigarettes by 11 days compared to those who only 437, and 451) and usual brand cigarettes
switching participants from usual brand had access to NNC cigarettes, (Refs. 390, 407, 413, and 452). VLNC
cigarettes to LNC or VLNC cigarettes, supporting the potential for less cigarettes were also rated lower on
dependence decreased in people who dependence over time among those who effects such as ‘‘aversiveness,’’
smoked cigarettes who were not switch to VLNC cigarettes (Ref. 64). ‘‘sickness,’’ and ‘‘dizziness’’ (Refs. 390,
interested in quitting compared to those Accordingly, despite some mixed 396, 414, 453, and 454), and higher on
who smoked NNC or usual brand results in studies using a gradual items such as ‘‘dislike’’ and
cigarettes for 6 weeks (Ref. 29), 10 decrease in nicotine content, most ‘‘unpleasant’’ compared to NNC or usual
weeks (Ref. 30), or 12 weeks (Ref. 31). evidence shows that switching to VLNC brand cigarettes (Refs. 265 and 383).
In smoking cessation studies in which cigarettes decreases dependence among These seemingly contradictory findings
participants endorsed wanting to quit, people who smoke cigarettes. The are likely due to the constructs that
VLNC cigarettes were also associated evidence also suggests that immediate these subjective effects measure;
with reductions in nicotine dependence nicotine reduction is more likely than ‘‘aversiveness,’’ ‘‘sickness,’’ and
over time (Refs. 32 to 35). Conversely, gradual reduction to lead to decreases in ‘‘dizziness’’ are used to measure direct
a trial in which people with serious dependence. For more discussion of the sensory and physical effects of nicotine,
mental illness who smoke and were not scientific evidence supporting an while ‘‘dislike’’ and ‘‘unpleasant’’ are
seeking smoking cessation treatment immediate nicotine reduction approach, used to measure general product liking.
were randomized to use either VLNC or see section VII.C of this document. Although often assumed, recent
NNC cigarettes for 6 weeks showed no findings confirm that greater immediate
10. Subjective Effects of VLNC
statistically significant differences in positive subjective effect ratings (e.g.,
Cigarettes
FTCD scores across VLNC and NNC ‘‘liking,’’ ‘‘satisfaction’’) predict greater
cigarette groups (Ref. 440). However, Self-reported subjective effects (e.g., acute reinforcing effects of cigarettes of
these results may be explained by the drug ‘‘liking,’’ ‘‘satisfaction’’) are widely varying nicotine content (Ref. 455).
high level of noncompliance (i.e., used measures of reinforcing efficacy Several factors have been shown to
ongoing use of NNC cigarettes or other and abuse liability of drugs and tobacco influence subjective effects ratings of
tobacco products) reported in the VLNC products. Drug ‘‘liking’’ is associated VLNC and NNC cigarettes. These factors
cigarette condition (Ref. 440) (see with drug self-administration and has include participants’ ability to
section VI.B of this document for further been shown to be the most sensitive and discriminate the nicotine content of
discussion of noncompliance). reliable subjective effects measure of cigarettes. For example, NNC cigarettes
To date, one study compared the abuse liability (Ref. 441). Many studies have increased ratings of positive
effects of gradual versus immediate have compared the subjective effects of subjective effects when participants are
nicotine reduction on FTND and VLNC, LNC, NNC, and participants’ able to discriminate them from VLNC
WISDM dependence scores (Ref. 379). usual brand cigarettes using self- cigarettes (Refs. 400 and 401).
In a 20-week double-blind, parallel reported measures of drug effects (e.g., Individuals who smoke menthol
design study, adults who smoke Cigarette Evaluation Scale, Smoking cigarettes rated both VLNC and NNC
cigarettes (n=1,250) were randomized to Effects Questionnaire, Visual Analogue cigarettes higher in positive subjective
an immediate reduction group that Scale items). These studies typically effects compared to people who smoke
received VLNC cigarettes, a gradual found that VLNC cigarettes are ‘‘liked’’ nonmenthol cigarettes (Ref. 456). In
reduction group that received cigarettes less than NNC and usual brand addition, positive subjective effects
containing progressively decreased cigarettes and, therefore, subject to ratings are higher when participants are
nicotine content every 4 weeks (15.5, lower abuse potential than NNC told that they are receiving a nicotine-
11.7, 5.2, 2.4, and 0.4 mg nicotine per cigarettes. containing cigarette, regardless of the
gram of total tobacco, respectively), or a Under conditions of brief exposure actual nicotine content of the cigarette
control group that received NNC when participants were given limited (Refs. 428, 435, 444, 445, and 457).
cigarettes. At the conclusion of 20 access to cigarettes that varied in Several studies assessed subjective
weeks, the immediate reduction group nicotine content, typically over the effects of VLNC cigarettes following
showed statistically significantly lower course of several hours under controlled extended exposure when participants
FTND and WISDM dependence scores laboratory conditions, studies generally were given less restricted access to
compared with the gradual reduction found that VLNC cigarettes were rated cigarettes of varying nicotine content in
group and the NNC cigarette control lower in cigarette ‘‘liking’’ compared to their natural environments (e.g., homes,
group; no statistically significant NNC or usual brand cigarettes (Refs. workplaces), typically over the course of
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00038 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5069
several weeks. Findings from these depression, insomnia, headache, and exposure studies reported differences
studies were relatively similar to increased craving. Although craving is between genders and generally found
findings from brief exposure studies. On often characterized as a symptom of that females who smoke experienced
average, VLNC cigarettes were rated as nicotine and tobacco withdrawal, it is greater reductions in craving (Refs. 265,
less appealing (e.g., lower ratings of also a symptom of dependence, and it 463 and 464) or withdrawal (Refs. 436
‘‘liking,’’ ‘‘satisfaction,’’ or ‘‘pleasure’’) can occur in the absence of other and 462) compared to males who smoke
compared to LNC and NNC cigarettes withdrawal symptoms. Thus, craving is after smoking VLNC cigarettes.
(Refs. 249 and 384). However, at least usually measured and reported However, another study found that, after
one study found no differences in separately from withdrawal. Studies smoking VLNC cigarettes, males who
subjective effects as a function of typically assess craving and withdrawal smoke had greater reductions in craving
cigarette nicotine content (Ref. 258). using the Questionnaire of Smoking compared to females who smoke (Ref.
Positive subjective effects ratings for Urges (QSU), QSU-Brief, Minnesota 435).
VLNC cigarettes were shown to remain Nicotine Withdrawal Scale (MNWS), During extended exposure studies,
constant or decrease over time (Refs. Shiffman-Jarvik Withdrawal Scale, and when participants smoked VLNC
249 and 373). Visual Analogue Scale items. Despite cigarettes from 4 days to 1 year, ratings
In a study where people who smoke their lower nicotine content, VLNC of withdrawal (Refs. 249 and 258) and
inhabited a residential research facility, cigarettes typically do not produce craving (Refs. 249 and 383) were
during 11 days of exposure, participants greater reports of craving or other generally similar to ratings observed in
who received NNC cigarettes rated withdrawal symptoms. Although usual brand and NNC cigarette
positive subjective effects lower and findings from some brief exposure conditions. In one study, researchers
negative subjective effects higher than studies are mixed, the results of many found that, after switching to VLNC
baseline subjective effects of usual studies suggest that brief and extended cigarettes from usual brand cigarettes for
brand cigarettes (indicative of a general exposure to VLNC cigarettes can 1 week, withdrawal symptoms
dislike of research cigarettes); however, suppress craving and withdrawal just as increased with no reported change in
subjective ratings of NNC study
effectively as NNC and usual brand craving (Ref. 32). However, these effects
cigarettes increased and were similar to
cigarettes. The ability of VLNC were relatively brief, and, within 6
usual brand cigarettes by the end of the
cigarettes to suppress craving and weeks, withdrawal symptoms returned
study (Ref. 64). In contrast, participants
withdrawal in people who smoke to baseline levels, and craving steadily
assigned to the VLNC cigarette group
cigarettes is likely at least partially due decreased below baseline levels. Results
rated positive subjective effects of
to the long history of pairings between from another study showed that VLNC
cigarettes (e.g., ‘‘enjoyable’’) lower and
nicotine and the sensorimotor stimuli cigarettes can produce persistent
negative subjective effects (e.g.,
associated with smoking. Through reductions in craving characterized by
‘‘unpleasant’’) higher than baseline
conditioning, these stimuli can suppress participants as ‘‘moderate’’ or ‘‘a lot’’
subjective effects of usual brand
craving and some other withdrawal after 3 and 6 weeks of exposure;
cigarettes throughout the entire study
symptoms even in the absence of however, some participants reported
period (Ref. 64).
nicotine (Ref. 38). that no relief from craving occurred
Finally, gender may influence
differences in subjective effects. In one In brief exposure studies where during the 6-week study (Ref. 373). In
study, women rated all cigarettes as participants were given limited access addition, one study demonstrated that 6
more flavorful than men, and an to reduced nicotine content cigarettes, weeks of exposure to LNC and VLNC
interaction was observed between typically over the course of several cigarettes resulted in less craving and no
gender and nicotine content such that hours under controlled laboratory difference in other withdrawal
women demonstrated less sensitivity conditions, VLNC cigarettes suppressed symptoms compared to NNC cigarettes
than men to the differential subjective craving and withdrawal relative to (Ref. 471). Finally, during week 1 of a
effects of NNC and VLNC cigarettes (Ref. baseline measures that were typically 20-week trial, people who smoke and
447). Another study found that women assessed following overnight abstinence were randomized to immediately reduce
reported increased satisfaction with (Refs. 452, 460 to 467). Furthermore, nicotine with VLNC cigarettes reported
VLNC or LNC cigarettes alone, while many studies showed that VLNC statistically significantly more
men reported greater satisfaction when cigarettes can reduce craving and withdrawal symptoms compared to
these cigarettes were combined with withdrawal as much as usual brand or those who gradually reduced nicotine
NRT (Ref. 458). Finally, one study found NNC cigarettes (Refs. 391, 406, 407, 411, content every 4 weeks (15.5 (NNC), 11.7
that women reported higher 413, 415, 417, 419, 422, 433 to 439). (NNC), 5.2 (LNC), 2.4 (LNC), and 0.4
psychological reward than men across However, some studies observed that (VLNC) mg nicotine per gram of total
all nicotine contents tested (Ref. 459). suppression of craving and withdrawal tobacco, respectively) and compared to
In sum, subjective effects data was lower after smoking VLNC a control group using NNC cigarettes
consistently show that VLNC cigarettes cigarettes compared to usual brand or (Ref. 379). However, at the conclusion of
have equal or lower abuse potential NNC cigarettes (Refs. 265, 396, 388, 402, 20 weeks, the immediate reduction
compared to NNC and usual brand 427, 440, 453, 454, 468, and 469). In group reported statistically significantly
cigarettes under conditions of brief and addition, results from a few studies lower smoking urges compared with the
extended exposure. FDA is not aware of suggest that VLNC cigarettes influence gradual reduction group and the NNC
any studies that found that VLNC craving more than withdrawal. One cigarette control group. No statistically
cigarettes had greater abuse potential study found that VLNC cigarettes significant differences in smoking urges
than NNC or usual brand cigarettes. suppressed craving similarly to NNC were observed between the gradual
cigarettes, but also produced an increase reduction group and the NNC cigarette
11. The Effects of VLNC Cigarettes on
in other withdrawal symptoms (Ref. control group, suggesting that gradual
Relief From Craving and Withdrawal
470). Other studies have found no reduction may be less effective than
Symptoms
effects of VLNC cigarettes on immediate reduction in reducing urge to
Symptoms of nicotine and tobacco withdrawal symptoms (Refs. 414, 428, smoke. Similar to findings from brief
withdrawal may include irritability, and 448). Notably, some of these brief exposure studies, female participants
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00039 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5070 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
experienced a reduction in craving after cigarettes also would be expected to cancer; cardiovascular diseases; and
switching to LNC cigarettes for 1 week, accrue for these product categories. COPD (Ref. 163). Accordingly, FDA
whereas male participants showed no While the current published literature believes it is appropriate to bridge these
change in craving upon switching. regarding very low nicotine products VLNC cigarette studies to cigars.
Overall, withdrawal symptoms discusses only cigarettes, the many
C. An Immediate Nicotine Reduction
increased in both males and females similarities between cigarettes and most
Approach Is Strongly Supported by
who smoke cigarettes after 1 week. cigars (in both appearance and use
Scientific Evidence
However, these differences from topography) support the application of
baseline were short-lived. Ratings of VLNC cigarette research to the coverage Two approaches have been suggested
both craving and withdrawal symptoms of these cigars. For example, little cigars for implementing a nicotine product
were no different than baseline over the are often indistinguishable from standard that would limit nicotine yield
remaining 6 weeks of the study (Ref. cigarettes given their shape, size, filters, by establishing a maximum level of
458). and packaging, and are perceived as nicotine content in cigarettes and
Craving and withdrawal were also being healthier than cigarettes (Refs. 297 certain other combusted tobacco
assessed in several smoking cessation and 298). Little cigars and certain products. One is a gradual reduction
studies wherein participants were cigarillos also ‘‘are packaged and approach, which decreases the nicotine
provided VLNC cigarettes along with consumed in a manner similar to content in the tobacco products over
pharmacotherapies (e.g., NRT, cigarettes’’ (Ref. 473 at p. 584). The time until it reaches minimally
varenicline) before a designated quit close resemblance of little cigars and addictive or nonaddictive levels. The
date. In these studies, participants who many cigarillos to cigarettes have led other is an immediate reduction
received VLNC cigarettes plus a nicotine consumers, particularly children and approach, or single target approach,
patch experienced less severe cravings, young adults, to mistake them for which would immediately reduce the
with no statistically significant cigarettes (Ref. 474). Because they are nicotine content to minimally addictive
difference in withdrawal (Ref. 472), a physically similar to cigarettes, little or nonaddictive levels. Available
greater reduction in craving and cigars are generally smoked the same research indicates that both approaches
withdrawal (Ref. 35), and less frequent way as cigarettes, with deeper are associated with noncompliance (i.e.,
and less intense cravings before and inhalation than large cigars (Refs. 53 use of NNC cigarettes) when
after the quit date (Ref. 372) compared and 475). Secondhand smoke from participants reach the VLNC cigarette
to those who received NNC cigarettes cigars also contains many of the same phase of the intervention, which
before the quit date. Another study toxins and carcinogens as cigarette supports findings from other studies
found that LNC cigarettes plus either smoke, including carbon monoxide, that show people who use VLNC
varenicline or NRT resulted in decreases nicotine, ammonia, benzene, cigarettes are more likely to use
in craving compared to nitrosamines, and formaldehyde, all of alternative nicotine-containing products
pharmacotherapy alone, with no which are on FDA’s list of HPHCs when such products are concurrently
differences in withdrawal across groups (HPHC Established List, 77 FR 20034 available. However, the available
(Ref. 371). (2012)). Moreover, people who smoke scientific evidence suggests that the
Accordingly, findings from these cigarettes who switch to products like gradual approach can lead to
studies suggest that the maximum cigars to sustain their addiction tend to compensatory smoking during the
nicotine level in this proposed product engage in deeper inhalation, making intermediate steps when people are
standard, consistent with VLNC them even more susceptible to the smoking products with low to moderate
cigarette levels, would not result in dangers associated with tobacco product nicotine content.
substantial increases in craving or other use (Ref. 53). Based on scientific evidence, as well
withdrawal symptoms. Studies also suggest that people as comments and information submitted
smoke some cigarillos like cigarettes, in response to the Nicotine ANPRM,
12. VLNC Cigarette Data Applies to
inhaling and smoking them every day FDA is proposing an immediate
Other Covered Products Under This
(Refs. 53 and 475). Research has found reduction approach to reach the
Proposed Product Standard
that little cigars deliver nicotine levels maximum nicotine level in this
Research regarding the public health similar to, and sometimes higher than, proposed product standard. We expect
impacts of this proposed maximum cigarettes, as well as similar or higher that there would be very little
nicotine level applies across the tobacco levels of carcinogens compared to compensatory smoking with an
products covered under this proposed cigarettes (Refs. 476 and 477). Large immediate reduction approach and that
product standard. People who smoke cigars can deliver as much as ten times any compensatory smoking would be
cigarettes who have lower SES have a the nicotine of a filtered cigarette (Ref. self-limiting and transient (i.e., research
greater likelihood of choosing to use 53). Even if people who smoke cigars do shows that people who smoke would be
RYO tobacco as a cheaper alternative to not breathe or inhale smoke into their unable to obtain their nicotine dose
factory-made cigarettes (Ref. 312, Ref. lungs, they are still subject to nicotine’s from VLNC cigarettes no matter how
319). Also, literature shows that tobacco addictive effects through buccal they smoked them and would quickly
manufactures reformulate or re-label absorption of nicotine or nicotine stop trying to do so), which would
pipe tobacco as ‘‘dual purpose’’ and sell absorption through the lips due to cigar increase the benefits of the proposed
it for RYO use to capitalize on tobacco’s alkalinity (Refs. 54 to 56, 302 product standard. We anticipate most
disparities between tax rates on and 303). Cigar smoke dissolves in people who smoke will maintain usual
different types of tobacco products (Ref. saliva and makes it possible for people smoking behavior during these 2 years.
322). Given that cigarette tobacco, RYO who smoke cigars to absorb sufficient An attempt to taper nicotine intake
tobacco, and pipe tobacco can be amounts of nicotine to create could involve switching to VLNC
effectively used in cigarettes, the VLNC dependence (Ref. 56). People who cigarettes already on the commercial
cigarette research applies to these smoke cigars regularly are at increased market (i.e., VLN® cigarettes), reducing
products, and any expected benefits that risk for many of the same diseases as the number of cigarettes smoked per
would accrue as a result of instituting people who smoke cigarettes, including day, or switching to another tobacco
the proposed product standard for oral, esophageal, laryngeal, and lung product. Tapering nicotine intake while
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00040 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5071
NNC cigarettes are on the market may approach to nicotine reduction would gradual reduction approach, and three
facilitate abstinence in smokers by increase compensatory smoking (Refs. of the studies utilized an immediate
increasing motivation to quit and quit 29 and 31). Like the gradual reduction reduction approach. CPD, breath CO,
attempts. However, we do not expect studies discussed in this section, and cotinine levels were compared
most people who smoke to switch to participants in these immediate between the immediate reduction group,
VLNC cigarettes while NNC cigarettes reduction studies were not interested in the gradual reduction group, and a
are available. We request comments, quitting and did not receive NRT or control group that received usual brand
data, and information regarding the alternative tobacco products. In the cigarettes. Relative to baseline,
selection of an immediate reduction most comprehensive immediate statistically significant decreases in CPD
approach. nicotine reduction study to date, 839 were observed in participants in the
Several studies have investigated the participants were randomized to one 6- gradual reduction groups (5 percent
effects of a gradual approach to reducing week condition, during which they decrease in CPD) and immediate
cigarette nicotine content on smoked their usual brand cigarettes or reduction groups (11 percent decrease
compensatory smoking (Refs. 40, 258, immediately switched to research in CPD), whereas statistically significant
329, and 384). In these studies, cigarettes containing either 15.8 (NNC), increases in CPD were observed in
participants were not interested in 5.2 (LNC), 2.4 (LNC), 1.3 (LNC), or 0.4 participants in the usual brand groups
quitting and did not receive NRT or (VLNC) mg nicotine per gram of total (12 percent increase in CPD). Although
alternative tobacco products. For tobacco (Ref. 29). Participants assigned statistically significant changes in
example, a pilot study and a clinical to the LNC or VLNC cigarette groups, breath CO were not observed relative to
trial examined whether a gradual who received cigarettes with nicotine baseline in any group, statistically
reduction in cigarette nicotine content content less than or equal to 2.4 mg significant decreases in cotinine were
would increase exposure to tobacco nicotine per gram of total tobacco, observed among both gradual and
smoke toxins due to compensatory smoked statistically significantly fewer immediate reduction groups, but not in
smoking (Refs. 40 and 258). Participants CPD than participants assigned to the the usual brand group.
smoked their usual brand cigarettes usual brand and NNC cigarette groups.
The largest study designed to directly
during baseline and then were switched Those who received LNC or VLNC
investigate gradual versus immediate
to five types of research cigarettes cigarettes containing 5.2 mg nicotine per
nicotine reduction on toxicant exposure
containing gradually reduced nicotine gram of total tobacco or less had
was a 10-site, randomized, double-blind
content (i.e., 10.3 (NNC), 6.5 (LNC), 3.9 statistically significantly lower urinary
clinical study in 1,250 adults who
(LNC), 1.7 (LNC), and 0.5 (VLNC) mg TNE than those who received NNC
smoke and had no intention to quit (Ref.
nicotine per cigarette). In the 10-week cigarettes. There were no differences in
379). Participants were randomly
pilot study, participants were switched breath CO measures, an indicator of
assigned to an immediate reduction
weekly, and in the 6-month trial, compensatory smoking, between the
group that received VLNC cigarettes for
participants were switched monthly cigarette groups. The total puff volume
20 weeks, a gradual reduction group
(Refs.40 and 258). Little change in at week 6 was statistically significantly
that received cigarettes containing
smoking behavior was observed; lower among participants who smoked
progressively decreased nicotine
however, plasma cotinine concentration VLNC cigarettes compared to those who
content every 4 weeks (15.5, 11.7, 5.2,
(a biomarker of nicotine exposure) smoked NNC cigarettes. However, much
2.4, 0.4 mg nicotine per gram of total
decreased as a function of cigarette like the gradual reduction studies, a
tobacco) for 20 weeks, or a control group
nicotine content, such that cotinine was secondary analysis showed that
that received NNC cigarettes for 20
lowest while participants were smoking noncompliance (i.e., ongoing use of
weeks. Notably, in this study (and
VLNC cigarettes. The smaller pilot study NNC cigarettes or other tobacco
virtually all clinical studies of reduced
showed little evidence of compensation, products) was high in participants
nicotine content cigarettes), research
as calculated based on cigarette randomized to the VLNC cigarette
consumption, CO, and polycyclic group, suggesting that VLNC cigarettes cigarettes were free to participants. Any
aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) have lower appeal and abuse liability changes in biomarker levels observed
metabolites (Ref. 40); however, the 6- compared to NNC cigarettes and that between these two groups would
month trial showed a slight increase in people who smoke VLNC cigarettes are indicate differences in smoking
compensatory smoking, as measured by likely to obtain nicotine from other behavior (e.g., CPD, smoking
CO and CPD, while participants were in tobacco product use (Ref. 330). topography). Completion rates were
the intermediate phase of the study. In another study, 33 participants were statistically significantly lower for the
This increase was no longer evident randomized to receive VLNC cigarettes immediate reduction group (68 percent)
once participants reached the VLNC at no charge or to continue smoking compared to the gradual reduction
cigarette phase of the study (Ref. 258). their usual brand cigarettes for 12 weeks group (81 percent) and control group (86
Another study showed that (Ref. 31). Overall, participants in both percent). The immediate reduction
compensatory smoking may increase groups smoked a similar total number of group had statistically significantly
when participants smoke cigarettes with CPD, even though only the participants lower levels of three primary biomarker
intermediate levels of nicotine (e.g., in the VLNC cigarette group received outcomes (i.e., CO, 3–HPMA, and r-1,t-
LNC cigarettes) compared to usual free cigarettes. These data demonstrate 2,3,c-4-tetrahydroxy-1,2,3,4
brand cigarettes (Ref. 384). Taken that an immediate reduction in cigarette tetrahydrophenanthrene) compared to
together, these studies demonstrate that nicotine content is unlikely to lead to the gradual reduction group, which did
people who smoke cigarettes may significant compensation or increased not differ from the control group. In
engage in compensatory smoking during toxicant exposure. addition, statistically significantly lower
the early stages of a gradual reduction A secondary analysis pooled data levels of other biomarkers (i.e., TNE,
approach by smoking more intensely in from five clinical studies to examine the NNAL, 2-cyanoethylmercapturic acid, 3-
an attempt to obtain their desired level relationship between compensatory hydroxy-1-methylpropylmercapturic
of nicotine (Refs. 258, 329, and 369). smoking and gradual versus immediate acid, S–PMA) were observed in the
Several studies have investigated nicotine reduction approaches (Ref. immediate reduction group compared to
whether an immediate reduction 387). Two of the studies utilized a the gradual reduction and the control
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5072 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
groups. The immediate reduction group could switch to or use with VLNC FDA’s Tobacco Products Laboratory,
smoked cumulatively fewer CPD over cigarettes. located in Atlanta, Georgia, has
the course of the 20-week study and had In sum, evidence from studies developed an analytical test method,
lower nicotine dependence scores involving VLNC cigarettes suggests it is entitled ‘‘Quantitation of Nicotine in
compared to the gradual reduction likely that there would be very little or Tobacco Products—Update to LIB No.
group, with no statistically significant no compensatory smoking with an 4550’’ (LIB #4692), that is capable of
differences in CPD or dependence in the immediate reduction approach to a quantifying nicotine levels that include
gradual reduction versus control groups. maximum nicotine level, which would concentrations well above and below
While there was no statistically increase the public health impact of a the proposed nicotine standard level
significant difference between the nicotine reduction policy. Additionally, and also meets formal intralaboratory
immediate and gradual reduction FDA believes an immediate reduction validation criteria (Ref. 478). The
groups in the proportion of participants approach would have a lesser impact on method utilizes GC–MS with a run time
with any ‘‘cigarette-free days’’ during manufacturers as compared to a gradual of 4.1 minutes. Analysis is conducted
the study, the immediate reduction approach by limiting any changes on extracted tobacco or spiked surrogate
group had a statistically significantly necessary for compliance to a single matrix samples treated with a base
occasion. Although FDA believes this is (sodium hydroxide) to obtain the total
higher number of ‘‘cigarette-free days’’
a benefit of the immediate reduction nicotine content for each sample.
compared to the gradual reduction
approach, it is not a determinative factor Quinoline is used as the internal
group. The immediate reduction group
given the strength of the scientific standard. Tomato leaves are used as a
had statistically significantly higher
evidence. surrogate matrix for tobacco to examine
withdrawal scores at week 1 compared
to the gradual reduction group; D. Scientific Evidence Supports the Use recovery amounts for spiked samples.
however, these differences dissipated of an Analytical Test Method To Validation was performed using
after the first week. The immediate Determine Nicotine Level Moonlight brand VLN Menthol King
ground tobacco and NIST 1573a
reduction group had higher rates of In its considerations regarding the use
(Tomato Leaves) as a blank spiking
noncompliance with non-study cigarette of an analytical test method, FDA
matrix. The range of the method was 0.1
use and a higher drop-out rate, which determined that any analytical method
to 2.0 mg of nicotine per gram of total
may have impacted the various outcome to measure compliance must accurately
tobacco, meaning nicotine
measures (e.g., biomarkers of exposure). and reliably detect nicotine at low
concentrations in this range can be
Additionally, the immediate reduction concentrations (i.e., below 0.70 mg
accurately measured. Tobacco samples
group had an increased number of nicotine per gram of total nicotine). In
with nicotine concentrations expected
adverse events (predominantly related addition, FDA determined that it is
to be higher than 2.0 mg nicotine per
to withdrawal) compared to the gradual important that the proposed product
gram of total tobacco were analyzed
reduction group. Nevertheless, this standard permit comparison of test
after dilution of the extraction sample
study provides further evidence that results among finished tobacco products
by a factor of ten. The method detection
immediate nicotine reduction is and testing facilities. FDA also
limit is 0.05 mg nicotine per gram of
associated with reduced toxicant concluded that it is important that the
total tobacco, which is more than an
exposure and nicotine dependence and test method demonstrate its suitability
order of magnitude below the proposed
increased smoking abstinence compared and reliability in accurately measuring a
maximum nicotine concentration of
to gradual nicotine reduction. This range of nicotine concentrations across
0.70 mg per gram of total tobacco. The
suggests that with immediate nicotine a wide variety of tobacco blends and
limit of quantitation is 0.1 mg nicotine
reduction, the potential health benefits products. Accordingly, FDA is
per gram of total tobacco, which is also
proposing to require manufacturers use
could occur sooner than gradual
well below the limit of the proposed
an analytical test method that would
nicotine reduction. While the
product standard. Furthermore, this
satisfy these preceding factors and
immediate reduction group had
method was proven to be applicable to
demonstrate that the test method was
increased levels of nicotine withdrawal,
a wide range of tobacco products.
validated in an analytical test
this effect was time-limited, dissipating
laboratory. In lieu of requiring a Tobacco filler and total tobacco from
after 1 week (Ref. 379). specified test method, we are various marketed tobacco products
Higher study attrition and recommending manufacturers consider including cigarettes, large cigars,
noncompliance with study cigarettes are using one of the three following cigarillos, little cigars, RYO cigarettes
common within VLNC cigarette analytical test methods FDA has and pipe tobacco were analyzed
conditions in clinical studies (Refs. 327, determined satisfy the preceding factors: successfully using FDA’s Tobacco
329, and 330), especially studies such as FDA’s Tobacco Products Laboratory Products Laboratory method.
the one described above (Ref. 379), method (Ref. 478), Cooperation Centre CORESTA updated CRM No. 62
wherein participants are not interested for Scientific Research Relative to (Determination of Nicotine in Tobacco
in quitting smoking, and they are asked Tobacco (CORESTA) Recommended and Tobacco Products by Gas
to refrain from using alternative sources Method (CRM) No. 62 (Determination of Chromatographic Analysis) in December
of nicotine. Because of the lower abuse nicotine in tobacco and tobacco 2021 and CRM No. 87 (Determination of
liability of VLNC cigarettes, participants products by gas chromatographic Nicotine in Tobacco Products by Gas
in these studies may drop out or use analysis; (Ref. 479)), or CRM No. 87 Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry
non-study cigarettes that contain (Determination of nicotine in tobacco (GC–MS)) in April 2020 to extend the
nicotine. These conditions would not products by gas chromatography-mass scope of the methods to include VLNC
exist if the proposed product standard is spectrometry (GC–MS); (Ref. 480)). tobacco by lowering the calibration
implemented. People who smoke would However, an analytical test method that range for these analytical test methods
not be able to readily obtain NNC meets the requirements of the (Refs. 479 and 480). A study determined
cigarettes, but they would be able to regulation, even if it is not one of the that the updated versions of CRM No. 62
obtain alternative noncombusted recommended methods, would be and CRM No. 87 are suitable for the
products with nicotine content that they acceptable. analysis of nicotine content in VLNC
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5073
tobacco and tobacco products (Ref. 481). date of this proposed rule (see section 1. Genetically Engineered Tobacco
These methods can reliably measure XI of this document).
Tobacco industry scientists have long
nicotine content as low as 0.117 mg per
The tobacco industry has developed a recognized the potential for genetic
gram of total tobacco.
range of brands with differing nicotine engineering to control nicotine content
FDA’s Tobacco Products Laboratory
levels. Tobacco product manufacturers (Ref. 485). The first practical application
method, entitled ‘‘Quantitation of
have extensive experience blending of biotechnology by a major tobacco
Nicotine in Tobacco Products—Update
tobaccos with different nicotine levels manufacturer was the development of
to LIB No. 4550’’ (LIB #4692), is
to ensure that products will have low nicotine content tobacco in the
publicly available at https://
precise levels of nicotine and using 1980s, which led to the receipt of a
www.fda.gov/science-research/field-
continuous quality testing throughout patent for biotechnology for altering
science-and-laboratories/laboratory-
the entire process to ensure that nicotine in tobacco plants (Refs. 483 and
information-bulletins. In addition to the
Tobacco Products Laboratory method, nicotine levels vary only minimally 486). Other tobacco researchers and
CRM No.62 (https://www.coresta.org/ within cigarette packs and from pack to major manufacturers also recognized the
determination-nicotine-tobacco-and- pack (Ref. 482). A cigarette is an value of biotechnology for developing
tobacco-products-gas-chromatographic- inexpensive and extremely effective low nicotine content tobacco for
analysis-29185.html) and CRM No. 87 nicotine delivery system that maximizes cigarettes, including for use as part of a
(https://www.coresta.org/determination- the cigarette’s addicting and toxic smoking cessation program (Ref. 487).
In the 1930s, some Havana and Cuban
nicotine-tobacco-products-gc-ms- effects (Ref. 61).
cigar tobacco varieties were discovered
33537.html) are also publicly available In fact, the tobacco industry has had
to have naturally lower nicotine levels.
methods that include the proposed programs in place since the 1960s to
Genetic analysis of these low nicotine
nicotine level in the range of obtain ‘‘any level of nicotine desired’’ containing plants identified a mutation
concentrations that can be accurately
(Ref. 2) (see section V.A for a detailed in the nic1 and nic2 genes that are
measured. FDA recommends
discussion). Indeed, the tobacco responsible for the production of
manufacturers use one of these
industry conducted research on reduced nicotine in some tobacco
analytical test methods to demonstrate
consumer perceptions of RNC cigarettes variety leaves (Ref. 488). These varieties
compliance with this proposed product
to determine the optimal amount of of low nicotine content cigar tobacco
standard.
nicotine in cigarettes to maintain were crossbred with burley tobacco to
It is reasonable to expect some
manufacturers may prefer to use other appeal. Reviews of industry documents produce varieties of cigarette tobacco
test methods. If developed and indicate that user experience, such as with low nicotine content to meet the
validated, such methods may have poor taste and reduced throat health demands of the time (Ref. 489).
sensations, impacted the commercial Several American and international
different advantages in ease of use,
viability of VLNC cigarettes (Refs. 247, tobacco companies genetically
upper and lower bounds of detection,
equipment, and expertise. We would 483, and 484). Internal industry engineered low-nicotine strains in the
evaluate data from analytical test strategies to mitigate these issues and 1960s and 1970s (Refs. 490 to 493),
methods as part of a premarket maintain VLNC cigarette appeal to including a strain with a nicotine
submission in accordance with section consumers included adding menthol to concentration as low as 0.15 percent
910 of the FD&C Act. enhance the flavor of RNC cigarettes (i.e., 1.5 mg nicotine per gram of total
FDA requests comments, including (Ref. 484) and maintaining or increasing tobacco), which was much lower than
data or other scientific support, tar levels to improve taste (Ref. 483). the 3.15 percent (31.5 mg nicotine per
regarding FDA’s Tobacco Products As discussed in this section, there are gram of total tobacco) observed in the
Laboratory method, CRM No. 62, CRM numerous methods for altering the comparator strain (Ref. 492). During that
No. 87, or other available methods, that time period, the Kentucky Tobacco
concentration of nicotine in cigarettes
could test the proposed scope of tobacco Research Board worked on genetic
and certain other combusted tobacco
products at the proposed maximum strains of low nicotine content tobacco
products, and FDA anticipates that
nicotine level. (with a nicotine content of 0.2 percent)
manufacturers and tobacco farmers may
to be used for experimental studies on
E. Scientific Evidence Supports the choose to use a variety of approaches to
the role of nicotine in smoking behavior
Technical Achievability of the Proposed meet the proposed maximum nicotine
(Refs. 493 to 497). In addition, Canadian
Maximum Nicotine Level Target concentration. Significant reduction of
researchers examined low nicotine
nicotine in the tobacco products
While FDA has analyzed various strains of tobacco, particularly in
covered by this proposed product
methods of technical achievability for association with efforts to develop a
standard can be achieved principally
this proposed product standard, section strain of flue-cured or air-cured tobacco
907(b)(1) of the FD&C Act also requires through tobacco blending, chemical that would be suitable as the base
FDA to consider information submitted extraction, or genetic engineering. Other material for reconstituted tobacco (Refs.
in connection with the proposed practices such as modified growing 493, 498, and 499). Although the early
product standard regarding the conditions (e.g., discontinue the strains of low-nicotine tobacco that were
technical achievability of compliance. practice of topping where the flowering developed by these researchers and
Therefore, pursuant to section 907(d)(2) head of the tobacco plant is removed to companies contained far less nicotine
of the FD&C Act, FDA requests produce leaves with a significantly than strains that were traditionally used
comments by interested parties, higher nicotine content, increase plant to make cigarettes, the nicotine content
including manufacturers and tobacco density, decrease nitrogen application), is even lower in strains that have been
growers, regarding the technical as well as more recent novel techniques, developed more recently through
achievability of compliance with this can also help to reduce nicotine levels. genetic engineering.
proposed product standard, including One or a combination of these processes Genetic engineering has resulted in
information concerning the existence of can be used to achieve the nicotine up to a 98 percent reduction in nicotine
patents that may impact the ability to target concentration in this proposed levels (Ref. 483). In 2003, Vector
comply by the proposed 2-year effective product standard. Tobacco began marketing the Quest
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5074 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
cigarette produced from genetically with an alkaline solution (Ref. 507). discontinuing these practices results in
modified tobacco containing only trace Supercritical fluid extraction (which a significant decrease in nicotine
amounts of nicotine (this product is no extracts chemical compounds using production (Ref. 518). It has been found
longer on the market) (Ref. 483). In supercritical carbon dioxide instead of that plant density is conversely
2014, the U.S. Patent and Trademark an organic solvent) also yielded success correlated to nicotine production in the
Office granted a patent for two genes in the 1990s, allowing for optimum plant as increased plant density creates
that may be suppressed to substantially extraction times and the elimination of a competition for resources, particularly
decrease nicotine in tobacco plants (Ref. more time-consuming steps (Ref. 508). nitrogen. Therefore, higher plant
500). Additionally, in 2020, the U.S. FDA notes that existing patents for densities lead to lower nitrogen
Patent and Trademark Office granted chemical extraction reveal that more availability and stunted plant growth,
another patent for methods of than 96 percent of nicotine can be thus resulting in lower nicotine tobacco
manipulating plant metabolism and successfully extracted from tobacco (Ref. 519).
alkaloid levels by controlling while retaining ‘‘a strong characteristic Nightshades are a botanical family
transcription factor NbTF7, which aroma . . . not different from the that naturally contain alkaloids,
regulates the nicotinic alkaloid unextracted blend,’’ achieving a product including nicotine. In addition to
biosynthetic pathway in the Nicotiana that ‘‘was subjectively rated as average tobacco plants, tomatoes, eggplants,
tabacum plant (Ref. 501). This method in nicotine characteristics’’ (Refs. 509 potatoes, and peppers are in the
appears to be able to introduce very low and 510). A major tobacco manufacturer nightshade category. Nicotine synthesis
nicotine traits in any variety of also has used a high-pressure carbon begins in the root of the tobacco plant
Nicotiana tabacum; therefore, this dioxide process similar to the process and researchers have studied whether
method may be applicable to other used to decaffeinate coffee. In this replacing tobacco root with other
combusted tobacco products that use process, tobacco leaf is treated with nightshades via grafting could affect
Nicotiana tabacum (e.g., cigars). ammonium salt, and then treated with nicotine biosynthesis (Ref. 519). Studies
Significant progress has been made in carbon dioxide/water vapor, to achieve have been performed where grafting
the genetic modification of nicotine and a 95 to 98 percent reduction in nicotine tobacco shoots on rootstocks of eggplant
other alkaloid production in tobacco. (Refs. 483 and 511). was shown to reduce nicotine
One powerful gene editing technology, Water extraction also can be used for production drastically without
CRISPR-Cas9, has been used to delete or nicotine reduction. Although some significant changes to the development
silence various genes involved in the manufacturers believe that some water of the plants (Ref. 520). Eggplant
production of nicotine in tobacco plants extraction practices may have rendered grafting results in differential expression
resulting in several ultra-low nicotine the tobacco ‘‘unsuitable for use’’ in of hundreds of genes involved in the
CRISPR tobacco lines that have been cigarettes, other water extraction nicotine biosynthetic pathway (Ref.
grown experimentally (Ref. 502). projects have yielded suitable smoking 520). In these studies, no significant
However, challenges have presented material with sizeable nicotine differences in plant height, leaf length,
themselves in transitioning these ultra- reductions (80 to 85 percent reduction leaf width, or stalk circumference were
low nicotine content tobacco plants to in leaf nicotine) (Refs. 493, 505, 512, observed between the tobacco/tobacco
fields, such as severely stunted plants and 513). and tobacco/eggplant groups up to 80
and high insect infestation rates (Ref. days after grafting. However, the grafted
3. Tobacco Farming Practices
503). Studies on the impact of tobacco/eggplant leaves resulted in a 95
genetically engineered low-level Different types of farming practices percent reduction in nicotine content as
nicotine are ongoing and this method also can lower nicotine concentrations compared to the tobacco/tobacco control
has not been accomplished on a large in tobacco plants. One example is plants (Ref. 520).
scale. alkaloid-minimizing farming practices.
4. Tobacco Blending/Crossbreeding
FDA is aware that genetically Industry studies have shown that
engineered tobacco seed has been changes to growing and harvesting One way to achieve lower nicotine
created and may be available for practices affect the development of concentrations in tobacco products is to
purchase on the market. If this proposed tobacco chemistry, including nicotine selectively blend the tobacco filler. Most
rule is finalized, licensing agreements content (Ref. 493). Some manufacturers cigarettes sold in the United States are
may be needed to support production of have revised their agricultural practices blended from several different types of
VLNC tobacco, at least initially. FDA specifically to meet new product tobacco (Ref. 359). A tobacco industry
notes that similar agreements with development goals, such as the executive previously testified that the
tobacco manufacturers are common production of low nicotine content main component of a cigarette that
within the tobacco industry. tobacco (Ref. 493). For example, one contributes to nicotine delivery is the
manufacturer evaluated how various tobacco blend, and year-to-year crop
2. Chemical Extraction
experimental agricultural practices variation does not determine the
Another method to achieve lower including bulk-curing, once-over nicotine content in a cigarette (Ref. 521).
nicotine concentrations in tobacco harvesting, and high plant density could The term ‘‘leaf blending’’ describes the
products is through chemical extraction affect the tobacco’s chemistry (Refs. 493 selection of tobaccos to be used in a
technology. By the 1970s, tobacco and 514). In other cases, chemical product by tobacco type (e.g., flue-
manufacturers were regularly practicing agents were observed to reduce nicotine cured, burley, oriental), geographical
nicotine extraction as a method to content (Refs. 493, 515 to 517). origin, year, and tobacco grade (Ref.
control nicotine delivery (Refs. 493 and Modification of tobacco growth 493). Blend differences can produce
504 to 506). Extraction methods include practices can result in reduced levels of significant variations in nicotine
water extraction (coupled with steam or nicotine in tobacco plants. In traditional concentration in the tobacco rod,
oven drying), solvent extraction, and tobacco production, plants are topped leading to differences in smoke
extractions of nicotine without usable and suckered (removing the growth at composition and yield (Ref. 82 at p.
leaf (Ref. 493). For example, one the apex and axillary buds) to slow the 469).
company, Ultratech, Inc., produced ripening rate of the leaves resulting in Many tobacco strains are available,
VLNC cigarettes by extracting nicotine increased nicotine content. Therefore, including approximately 1,000 different
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5075
tobacco varieties (Ref. 359). The tobacco Internal tobacco industry documents By using one or a combination of
industry has used breeding and describe the use of leaf blending and methods described above, FDA
cultivation practices to develop high tobacco selection to control cigarette concludes there is ample evidence of
nicotine tobacco plants to give nicotine content (Ref. 493). For the technical feasibility of complying
manufacturers greater flexibility in example, one company project with this proposed product standard to
blending and in controlling the amount determined that manufacturers could reduce the nicotine level in cigarettes
of nicotine to be delivered (Ref. 522 at reduce cigarette nicotine content by and certain other combusted tobacco
41694). These practices could be used to selecting grades of tobacco with products.
develop low nicotine content tobacco naturally low nicotine content (Ref.
6. Applicability to Other Combusted
plants as well. Tobacco industry 523). Another observed that the demand
Tobacco Products and Smaller
documents show that in the 1960s, for low nicotine content tobacco has
Manufacturers
tobacco companies recognized the increased worldwide and necessitated a
increasing demand for low nicotine shift in purchasing standards (Ref. 524). FDA anticipates that manufacturers of
content tobacco and began instituting non-cigarette tobacco products covered
projects that found low nicotine content 5. Other Practices by this proposed product standard may
cigarettes can be made by selecting After tobacco is harvested, it is cured also choose to use a variety of
grades of tobacco with low nicotine and aged before being used in tobacco approaches to meet the proposed
content (Refs. 523 and 524). products. The aging process naturally maximum nicotine level. Given the
Because the nicotine content of changes the chemistry of the tobacco, similarities between the tobacco used in
tobacco plants varies, manufacturers cigarettes and in other combusted
including some reduction in nicotine
could replace more commonly used tobacco products that FDA proposes to
content (Ref. 493). At least one
nicotine-rich varieties like Nicotiana include within the scope of this product
manufacturer has explored efforts to
rustica with lower nicotine varieties standard, FDA expects that it is
speed the tobacco aging process, in part
(Ref. 525). For example, oriental similarly technically feasible for non-
to alter or limit the changes in chemistry
Turkish-type cigarettes also deliver cigarette tobacco products to comply
that naturally occur (Refs. 493 and 530).
substantially less nicotine than with the proposed maximum nicotine
Other approaches to curing and
cigarettes that contain air-cured burley level. FDA requests comments, data,
fermenting tobacco have been explored
tobacco (Refs. 82 and 526). Even and research regarding the feasibility of
as methods for altering nicotine content.
without this selective breeding, using the techniques discussed in this
For example, in one manufacturer’s
manufacturers could use careful tobacco section, or other nicotine reduction
report, researchers observed that the
leaf purchasing plans to control the techniques, for the non-cigarette
properties of tobacco, including nicotine
nicotine content in their products (Ref. products covered under this proposed
content, could be altered without the
522 at 41694). By maintaining product standard.
need for nontobacco additives by
awareness of the differences and Although industry documents contain
modifying curing practices (Ref. 531). In
monitoring the levels in purchased little information regarding feasibility of
addition, manufacturers have explored
tobacco, companies could produce VLNC levels for non-cigarette products,
other approaches to identify microbial
cigarettes with nicotine deliveries an early 1962 patent does indicate a
bacteria that actively degrade nicotine
consistent to one-tenth of 1 percent tobacco storage process that
while leaving other components of the
(despite annual variations of up to 25 dramatically reduced nicotine levels,
leaf intact (Refs. 532 and 533).
percent in the nicotine content of the including in shade-grown Connecticut
Consumer product testing showed that
raw material grown in the same area) tobacco used for cigars, from 0.85
(Ref. 522 at 41694). the ‘‘product acceptability’’ of that percent to 0.075 percent nicotine
Grading, which is used to evaluate tobacco was equal to that of untreated content (i.e., from 8.5 to 0.75 mg
and identify differences within tobacco tobacco (Ref. 534). nicotine per gram of total tobacco) (Ref.
types, is a function of both plant Researchers also have developed 537). In 1975, a large tobacco
position (i.e., higher or lower leaf novel approaches to reducing the manufacturer also discussed
position on the stalk) and quality (i.e., nicotine in tobacco products in recent development of a low nicotine cigar or
ripeness), and segregation of grades by years. An example of one such approach cigarillo, including processed low
nicotine content has become common is enzymatic digestion utilizing glucose nicotine content tobaccos such as a
practice (Ref. 493). The position of oxidase harvested from the salivary burley filler in the range of 0.34 percent
leaves on the plant stalk affects nicotine excretion produced by a specific species nicotine (i.e., 3.4 mg nicotine per gram
levels: tobacco leaves located near the of herbivorous caterpillar, helicoverpa of total tobacco) and methods for
top of the plant can contain higher zea (Ref. 535). The extracted enzyme is reducing nicotine in the cigar wrapper
concentrations of nicotine, and lower applied to the harvested tobacco leaves, (Ref. 538).
stalk leaves generally contain lower reducing the nicotine in the tobacco leaf FDA expects that smaller
nicotine levels (Refs. 493, 525, and 527). by up to 75 percent, providing an manufacturers may use a variety of
For example, flue-cured tobacco leaves ‘‘effective and economical system for methods to comply with the proposed
harvested from the lowest stalk position producing tobacco products which product standard, including purchasing
may contain from 0.08 to 0.65 percent contain about 0.01 mg nicotine per tobacco blends that are lower in
nicotine (i.e., 0.8 to 6.5 mg nicotine per cigarette or less . . . while maintaining nicotine or have already undergone
gram of total tobacco), whereas leaves the other desirable ingredients for good extraction. FDA believes that the supply
from the highest positions may contain taste and flavor’’ (Ref. 535). Another chain should be capable of adapting to
from 0.13 to 4.18 percent nicotine (i.e., novel approach is the use of microwave- the purchasing needs of smaller
1.3 to 41.8 mg nicotine per gram of total assisted technology to extract nicotine manufacturers as well as larger
tobacco) (Refs. 359, 528 and 529). from tobacco, including cigar filler (Ref. manufacturers, particularly given the
Therefore, substituting leaves found 536), that also could be effective for prevalence of genetically engineered
lower on the plants (commonly called reducing the nicotine content for other tobacco, as discussed in this section.
‘‘priming’’) could reduce the nicotine tobacco products such as RYO tobacco FDA requests comments, including data
content of tobacco products (Ref. 525). and pipe tobacco. and research, regarding the methods and
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00045 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5076 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
options smaller manufacturers may use from 26.2–30.4 nanograms of nicotine further discussion of receptor
to comply with this proposed product per milliliter of plasma (Ref. 539). occupancy, see section VII.B.8 of this
standard. Researchers observed similar effects document.
among participants who smoked a
F. Proposal Does Not Seek To Limit 3. VLNC Cigarette Nicotine Smoke Yield
single VLNC cigarette made by Philip
Nicotine to Zero
Morris for research purposes only (Ref. Nicotine ‘‘yield’’ refers to the amount
Section 907(d)(3) of the FD&C Act 259). of nicotine in tobacco smoke as
expressly prohibits FDA from requiring Studies with longer exposure to VLNC measured through machine-generated
the reduction of the nicotine yield of a cigarettes have also found evidence of smoking methods (e.g., ISO machine
tobacco product to zero, and consistent nicotine exposure within study smoking method, CI smoking method,
with that provision FDA is not seeking participants. For example, studies FTC smoking method), and is typically
to do so. However, section showed that after several days or weeks measured and reported in milligrams
907(a)(4)(A)(i) of the FD&C Act of smoking VLNC cigarettes, biomarkers per cigarette. The maximum level of
expressly authorizes FDA to establish of nicotine exposure—such as urinary nicotine set by this proposed product
product standards with provisions ‘‘for cotinine and TNE (i.e., the sum of standard would result in nicotine yield
nicotine yields,’’ which includes the nicotine and various nicotine in tobacco smoke that is at detectable
authority to include a provision, such as metabolites)—in people who smoke levels above zero. For example,
the one in this proposed rule, to require cigarettes were drastically reduced but SPECTRUM NNC cigarettes that contain
reduction of nicotine yield to a level were still detectable (Refs. 32 and 265). 15.8–16.6 mg of nicotine per gram
other than zero. The information Notably, if participants in these studies tobacco filler have machine-measured
provided in this section demonstrates were noncompliant with study-assigned nicotine yields of 0.7–0.8 mg of nicotine
that the proposed product standard does cigarettes, then some of the biomarkers per cigarette. SPECTRUM VLNC
not require the level of nicotine to be of nicotine exposure could be attributed research cigarettes that contain 0.3–0.4
zero. The level of nicotine proposed in to the use of other tobacco products. mg of nicotine per gram tobacco filler
this product standard is measurable in However, evidence from studies in have quantifiable machine-measured
the tobacco filler and in the smoke which participants were confined to nicotine yields greater than zero,
yield. Research shows that after use of hotels or residential research facilities
ranging from 0.03–0.04 mg of nicotine
VLNC cigarettes, nicotine is measurable without access to other tobacco
per cigarette (Ref. 254). Similarly,
in the body via biomarkers of exposure products also demonstrate that extended Quest® 3 VLNC cigarettes had
and neurological receptor occupancy. exposure to VLNC cigarettes produces
quantifiable machine-measured nicotine
biomarkers of nicotine exposure and
1. Nicotine Biomarkers of Exposure yields of approximately 0.03 mg of
physiological responses consistent with
nicotine per cigarette (Ref. 540).
Studies have shown that levels of nicotine exposure (Refs. 64 and 423).
nicotine biomarkers increase in people Taken together, these data consistently In summary, the data indicate that
who smoke cigarettes containing show that levels of nicotine biomarkers nicotine is measurable in both the
nicotine equivalent to FDA’s proposed of exposure in people who smoke VLNC tobacco filler and the smoke yield of
nicotine level, thereby demonstrating cigarettes are still detectable. For further VLNC cigarettes and therefore does not
exposure to nicotine from smoking discussion of biomarkers of exposure, equal zero. After using VLNC cigarettes,
VLNC cigarettes (Refs. 259, 402, and see section VII.B.6 of this document. nicotine exposure has been shown to
539). Short-term studies that measure occur as evidenced by studies
nicotine exposure in people who smoke 2. Receptor Occupancy and Cerebral measuring biomarkers of nicotine
cigarettes who smoke one or two VLNC Response From the Use of VLNC exposure and neurological receptor
cigarettes have generally found Cigarettes occupancy. Consequently, FDA finds
increases in plasma nicotine levels that Studies have shown that the nicotine that the proposed product standard
follow similar, but less dramatic, provided by VLNC cigarettes is enough would not require the reduction of
patterns seen following smoking regular to occupy sufficient numbers of nicotine nicotine yields to zero.
nicotine cigarettes. For example, one receptors in the brain (i.e., a4b2 VIII. Determination That the Standard
study evaluated plasma nicotine nAChRs) to mitigate feelings of Is Appropriate for the Protection of the
exposure before and repeatedly after withdrawal and craving. PET and MRI Public Health
smoking a single NNC, LNC, VLNC, or data obtained from people who smoke
usual brand cigarette (Ref. 402). While cigarettes indicate that after smoking a The Tobacco Control Act authorizes
the LNC and VLNC cigarettes were VLNC cigarette, nicotine receptors FDA to adopt tobacco product standards
associated with lower plasma nicotine located in numerous areas of the brain by regulation if it finds that such
levels compared to the NNC and usual are occupied despite the lower nicotine tobacco product standards are
brand cigarettes, all cigarettes were content of VLNC cigarettes, and these appropriate for the protection of the
associated with statistically significant participants reported a statistically public health (section 907(a)(3)(A) of the
increases in plasma nicotine compared significant reduction in craving FD&C Act). The notice of proposed
to baseline levels (Ref. 402). Similarly, compared to before smoking the VLNC rulemaking (NPRM) for such a product
22nd Century Group, Inc. submitted cigarette (Ref. 430). In another study standard must set forth this finding with
modified risk tobacco product that compared VLNC and NNC supporting justification, which FDA is
applications to FDA containing data cigarettes, exposure to both types of providing here (section 907(c)(2)(A)) of
from two clinical studies showing that cigarettes resulted in the binding of the FD&C Act.
peak plasma nicotine levels following nicotine to receptors in the brain and In order to make this finding, FDA
use of a single VLNC cigarette ranged the release of dopamine (Ref. 425). must consider scientific evidence
from 0.4–0.5 nanograms of nicotine per However, the magnitude of subjective concerning:
milliliter of plasma and total nicotine craving or withdrawal responses • The risks and benefits to the
levels (i.e., plasma nicotine area under observed following use of VLNC population as a whole, including users
the curve calculated using the cigarettes was lower than use of NNC and nonusers of tobacco products, of the
trapezoidal rule to 180 minutes) ranged cigarettes (Refa. 425 and 461). For proposed standard;
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00046 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5077
• The increased or decreased death from tobacco product use (Refs. 1 cigarettes, RYO tobacco, non-premium
likelihood that existing users of tobacco and 28). As a result, FDA expects that cigars, and pipe tobacco. FDA’s
products will stop using such products; making cigarettes and certain other modeling framework and
and combusted tobacco products minimally methodological approach and the
• The increased or decreased addictive or nonaddictive would reduce associated inputs and assumptions have
likelihood that those who do not use tobacco-related harms by promoting been peer reviewed by independent
tobacco products will start using such smoking cessation or complete external experts. Taking into
products. migration to alternative, potentially less consideration comments from this peer
Section 907(a)(3)(B)(i) of the FD&C Act. harmful noncombusted tobacco review (Ref. 49), FDA revised the
FDA has considered scientific products and by reducing initiation. In modeling document, and the final
evidence related to all three factors. this section, we summarize the modeling document is available in the
Based on these considerations, as approach used to estimate the possible docket for this proposed rule (Ref. 42).
discussed below, we find that the impact of a potential nicotine tobacco FDA’s modeling work informed the
proposed standard is appropriate for the product standard to the population as a development of this proposed product
protection of the public health because whole and present the findings of this standard. FDA requests comments on
it would increase the likelihood that analysis. the methodology and analysis
many people who currently smoke To assess the potential public health (including the overall model in terms of
cigarettes and/or certain other impacts of a nicotine product standard, the inputs, transition behaviors, and
combusted tobacco products would stop FDA developed a population health outputs) presented in the scientific
smoking altogether, yielding significant model using inputs derived from modeling document.
health benefits from smoking cessation. available empirical evidence and expert FDA’s population health model
Additionally, we find that the proposed opinion to estimate the impact of incorporates the following tobacco use
standard is appropriate for the changes in tobacco product initiation, transitions to estimate the impact of the
protection of the public health because cessation, switching, and dual use on policy: (1) cigarette smoking cessation;
it would decrease the likelihood that tobacco use prevalence, morbidity, and (2) people who smoke cigarettes
people who do not smoke cigarettes mortality in the United States. Details of switching to noncombusted tobacco
and/or use certain other combusted this modeling approach have been products rather than quitting tobacco
tobacco products—including youth and previously published in two peer- use entirely; (3) people who continue to
young adults—who experiment with reviewed publications (Refs. 47 and 48), smoke cigarettes beginning dual use of
combusted tobacco products will which describe the overall model in cigarettes and noncombusted tobacco
become addicted to these products, terms of the inputs, transition behaviors, products; (4) people who do not smoke
thereby decreasing progression to and outputs that it contains, along with initiating regular cigarette smoking; and
regular use, resulting in reduced results from simulation studies. In (5) people who do not smoke who have
tobacco-related morbidity and mortality preparation for this proposed product been dissuaded from smoking cigarettes
associated with combusted tobacco standard, FDA updated the model and certain other combusted tobacco
product use. Increased cessation, as well published previously (Ref. 47), which products, who instead initiate use of a
as decreased initiation, progression to describes the impact of a potential noncombusted tobacco product. The
regular use, and consumption would product standard that limits the level of model, based on input parameters
lead to lower disease and death in the nicotine in cigarettes, RYO tobacco, derived from empirical evidence and
U.S. population, due to decreased use of non-premium cigars, and pipe tobacco expert estimates, projected the impact of
cigarettes and certain other combusted so that they are minimally addictive or a potential nicotine product standard on
tobacco products. Furthermore, the rule nonaddictive.29The details of this four main outcomes: (1) prevalence of
is appropriate for the protection of the analysis are presented in an updated cigarette smoking and noncombusted
public health because the population as modeling document, entitled tobacco use; (2) tobacco-attributable
a whole would likely experience ‘‘Methodological Approach to Modeling mortality; (3) life years lost due to
additional health benefits as a result of the Potential Impact of a Nicotine tobacco use; and (4) quality-adjusted life
reduced secondhand smoke exposure, Product Standard on Tobacco Use, years (QALYs) lost due to cigarette
smoking-related fires, and smoking- Morbidity, and Mortality in the U.S.’’ smoking-attributable morbidity in the
related perinatal conditions. (Ref. 42). We estimated the potential U.S. population over time. The model
impacts of a nicotine product standard explores various baseline scenarios via
A. Approach To Estimating Impacts to
by modeling a baseline scenario of use sensitivity analyses, including with and
the Population as a Whole
of cigarettes and noncombusted tobacco without projections that incorporate
Current evidence shows that, while products including smokeless tobacco, implementations of other future tobacco
nicotine itself is not the direct cause of e-cigarettes, HTPs, and oral nicotine product standards (e.g., flavored cigar
most smoking-related diseases, products. We then compared the and menthol cigarette product
addiction to the nicotine in tobacco baseline scenario to a product standard standards).
products is the proximate driver of scenario characterized by the More detailed information regarding
tobacco-related death and disease introduction of a potential nicotine modeling study methodology, including
because it sustains tobacco use (Refs. 1, product standard that would apply to descriptions of the model inputs, data
28, 58, and 61). The addiction caused by sources, and assumptions used to derive
nicotine in tobacco products is critical 29The policy scenario presented in Apelberg et al. estimates of the potential impact of a
in the transition of people who smoke 2018 (Ref. 47) did not define a specific level of nicotine product standard on
cigarettes from experimentation to nicotine as minimally addictive or nonaddictive. population health can be found in
Rather, the policy scenario simulated
sustained smoking and in the FDA’s modeling document (Ref. 42).
implementation of a hypothetical standard in which
maintenance of smoking for those who cigarettes and certain other combusted tobacco Briefly, the simulation began with an
want to quit (Refs. 1 at p. 113 and 28). products were made minimally addictive or initial population that reflected the sex
Combusted tobacco products, including nonaddictive, informed by a formal expert and age (based on 2021 U.S. Census
elicitation process, and used to estimate the impact
cigarettes, are responsible for the Bureau estimates) and cigarette use
of decreasing the addictiveness of cigarettes on
overwhelming burden of disease and certain tobacco use behaviors. distribution (i.e., never, current, former
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00047 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5078 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
use; estimated from the 2020 NHIS data mortality through linkage with the use and policy were provided to a panel
and 2020 NYTS data) in the U.S. National Death Index from 2002 through of eight experts prior to the conference
population. Next, we incorporated sex- 2019 (Ref. 545). NHIS–LMF never-user sessions. Experts were asked to identify
specific rates for smoking initiation and death rates are adjusted for low any other relevant information to share
cessation for year 2021 modeled using mortality in the NHIS’s civilian with the panel. Detailed written
cigarette smoking histories for birth noninstitutionalized population, due to questionnaires were completed by each
cohorts reconstructed from NHIS data the survey’s exclusion of people in expert as independent take-home
by Cancer Intervention and Surveillance institutionalized settings such as long- exercises. To maintain the
Modeling Network (CISNET) researchers term care institutions (e.g., nursing independence of the experts and
(Ref. 541). Recent analyses using data homes, hospitals for the chronically ill encourage open discussion,
from the Population Assessment of or physically or intellectually disabled, involvement of FDA staff was limited.
Tobacco and Health (PATH) Study (Ref. wards for abused or neglected children), This general process was repeated in
542) provide data on initiation of ENDS persons in correctional facilities (e.g., 2018 to ensure that estimates reflected
from Wave 4 (2016–2017) to Wave 5 prisons or jails, juvenile detention the experts’ current assessment of the
(2018–2019); however, those estimates centers, halfway houses), and U.S. research literature and potential effects
are related to transitions from never use nationals living in foreign countries. of a hypothetical product standard.
to ever use of a specific product at the The adjustment was done by using the Seven of the original eight experts
current wave, rather than transitions to ratio of U.S. death rates from the 2019 agreed to participate in the second
established use, as defined in the vital statistics data to NHIS–LMF death elicitation. Participants received
population model. In the absence of up- rates by sex and age (Ref. 546). Death updated briefing materials, and an
to-date estimates of exclusive rates for people who have never smoked online workshop was held in April
noncombusted product initiation rates cigarettes are projected for the period 2018. The experts, once again,
from the published scientific literature, from 2022 through 2100 using mortality subsequently completed a detailed
data regarding exclusive initiation of scaling factors obtained from the Lee- questionnaire.
noncombusted tobacco products and Carter mortality forecasting method To explore the possible impact of a
dual use were derived by scaling the (Refs. 547 to 549). To estimate mortality hypothetical policy reducing nicotine
sex- and age-specific smoking initiation for e-cigarettes and other noncombusted levels, the experts were asked to assume
rates from CISNET using youth (ages 9– tobacco products, we apply the same that combusted tobacco products that
17) prevalence estimates from the 2017– risks that are used for smokeless could be viewed as highly likely to
2020 NYTS, and young adult (ages 18– tobacco. Our assumptions about all- serve as substitutes for traditional
24) prevalence estimates from the 2020 cause mortality risk among people who cigarettes (i.e., RYO tobacco, pipe
NHIS (Ref. 542). NYTS prevalence tobacco, non-premium cigars) would be
use smokeless tobacco in the United
estimates for noncombusted product use included in the policy, while other
States were informed by the first
correspond to frequent use, defined as tobacco products (i.e., premium cigars,
NHANES, Cancer Prevention Study I
use at least 20 days in the past 30 waterpipe/hookah, e-cigarettes,
(CPS–I), and Cancer Prevention Study II
days.30Additional details regarding the smokeless tobacco) would be excluded.
(CPS–II). Mortality probabilities for
estimation of scaling factors to compute While the policy scenario presented in
people who currently use and formerly
noncombusted product initiation rates FDA’s modeling document (Ref. 42) is
used tobacco are obtained by
can be found in FDA’s modeling based on a reduction of the nicotine
multiplying never-user probabilities of
document (Ref. 42). CISNET sex- and level in cigarettes, cigarette tobacco,
dying by relative risk according to
age-specific cigarette smoking cessation RYO tobacco, certain cigars and pipe
tobacco use status.
rates derived from NHIS data were tobacco, the estimated population
Quantitative inputs for tobacco use
utilized as cessation rates for all product impact in the main analysis is solely
categories, including noncombusted transitions following implementation of based on reductions in cigarette
tobacco use. Age-specific rates of the proposed product standard were smoking. Cigarettes are the only one of
switching from cigarettes to obtained through a formal expert these combusted products to be
noncombusted tobacco products were elicitation process that was first incorporated directly in the model,
derived from prior research (Ref. 543). conducted in 2015 and then repeated in given that cigarette smoking is
Overall U.S. death rates from 2019 vital 2018. FDA is conducting another expert responsible for the bulk of morbidity
statistics data were used to reflect the elicitation to obtain updated and mortality caused by combusted
death rates at baseline for individuals quantitative inputs for tobacco use tobacco product use. Estimates of
under age 35 who never smoked, since transitions and intends to publish the mortality benefits due to reductions in
smoking-related mortality is minimal results for public review and comment. non-premium cigar and pipe tobacco
before this age (Ref. 544). For ages 35 For the 2015 and 2018 expert use are derived from model outputs, as
and older at baseline, FDA estimated elicitations, the methodology used to explained below, although these
annual death rates from 2019 NHIS– identify experts, develop the protocol, estimates would not include other
LMF data among participants who have conduct the elicitation, and summarize population health benefits such as
never smoked in NHIS from 1997 the findings can be found in a previous reduced morbidity.
through 2018 who were followed for peer-reviewed publication (Ref. 47) and The experts were asked to predict and
in FDA’s modeling document (Ref. 42). quantify the anticipated impact of the
30While past 30-day use is the conventional Briefly, the initial elicitation process policy on the following model
definition of current use of a tobacco product in the centered around three online parameters: (1) cigarette smoking
NYTS, we utilized the corresponding definition of conferencing sessions held during cessation rates; (2) switching from
frequent use (20 or more days of use in past 30
January and February 2015, following a cigarette smoking to other tobacco
days) to correspond with initiation of regular use
that is more closely associated with longer-term written protocol designed to elicit products excluded from the
health outcomes. In this context, we have scaled the opinions using a structured, hypothetical policy scenario (i.e.,
initiation rates to reflect the initiation of regular, standardized approach. Briefing books premium cigars, waterpipe/hookah
longer-term use. This approach is consistent with
with key papers on the topics of interest tobacco, smokeless tobacco, e-cigarettes
that for adult initiation to regular use and long-term
cessation as defined by CISNET. as well as background data on tobacco or other ENDS); (3) dual use rates; (4)
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00048 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5079
cigarette smoking initiation rates; and percent, respectively, in 2015. For noncombusted tobacco product risk;
(5) initiation rates for other tobacco product switching (from cigarettes to and the effects of a nicotine product
products excluded from the noncovered tobacco products), the standard, accounting for the emergence
hypothetical policy scenario. Each of median estimates were 56 and 58 of an illicit market for normal nicotine
the experts was asked to provide his or percent in the first and subsequent years content cigarettes. Additional detailed
her best estimate of the parameters’ true following implementation in the 2018 information concerning these sensitivity
value, estimates of the minimum and expert elicitation and 41 and 40 percent analyses can be found in FDA’s
maximum plausible values, and in 2015. Median estimates of reductions modeling document (Ref. 42). Overall,
estimates of the 5th, 25th, 75th, and in smoking initiation were 63 and 65 the results from FDA’s population
95th percentile values. Experts were percent in the first and subsequent years health modeling, even accounting for
asked first about impacts in the first in the 2018 elicitation, and 46 and 49 the impacts of the factors utilized in
year immediately following the percent in 2015. Overall, the experts’ FDA’s sensitivity analyses, clearly
potential product standard’s estimates indicate that the proposed demonstrate the public health benefit of
implementation and then about impacts product standard would introduce the proposed product standard.
in the years following the first full year substantial changes in tobacco use In 2022, FDA issued proposed
of implementation. Experts had the behaviors which would result in product standards to prohibit menthol
option of providing separate estimates substantial public health benefits. Given as a characterizing flavor in cigarettes
of impacts for males and females for the the inherent uncertainty associated with (87 FR 26454, May 4, 2022) and to
initial and subsequent years. For each projecting the long-term impact of a prohibit all characterizing flavors (other
question, experts were asked to provide future regulatory action, FDA conducted than tobacco) in cigars (87 FR 26396,
the factors they considered pertinent to a range of analyses to examine the May 4, 2022). If finalized, these rules are
answering the question, including the impact of uncertainty around key model anticipated to reduce overall youth
studies and research findings most inputs and assumptions on tobacco use initiation and increase cessation among
individuals who smoke cigarettes and
influential to informing their views, and prevalence and premature mortality.
non-premium cigars. In sections VIII.E
to rate their familiarity with the relevant First, in the main analysis, we examined
and VIII.F of this document, we describe
literature. The elicitation process uncertainty in the behavioral responses
how we adjusted our model by utilizing
provided the experts with opportunities to a potential nicotine product standard
estimates of the likely population health
to interact and discuss divergent views, by conducting a Monte Carlo simulation
impact of these rules, quantified in peer-
from which each expert generated their (Ref. 550). For the product standard
reviewed publications and discussed in
initial and final estimates. In the scenario, a Latin hypercube sampling
the proposed rules, to adjust the
updated elicitation, experts were also design with 1,000 simulations was
baseline inputs for initiation of
asked to assess the potential effects of conducted for each set of expert-defined
combusted and noncombusted products,
an alternative product standard that distributions, resulting in a total of
as well as cessation of combusted
would only apply to cigarettes, cigarette 7,000 simulations (Ref. 551 at p. 524).
products and likelihood of switching to
tobacco, and RYO tobacco, although The resulting outputs were aggregated to
incorporate the impact of the rules in
they were not required to provide create an overall set of output
this proposed nicotine product
quantitative estimates of the effects of distributions, and distribution
standard.
such a standard. percentiles were calculated across all
While parameter estimates and their 7,000 simulations. For each simulation, B. The Likelihood That Nonusers Would
probability distributions varied the policy scenario was compared to the Start Using Cigarettes or Other
somewhat among participants, most baseline scenario to estimate changes in Combusted Tobacco Products
experts had the view that making the outcomes. Key distribution Nicotine is an addictive chemical and
cigarettes and certain other combusted responses in FDA’s modeling document the primary constituent in cigarettes and
tobacco products minimally addictive highlight the positive impacts to the other tobacco products that causes and
would lead to substantial initial and public health of the proposed product maintains addiction. It is a significant
long-term increases in smoking standard (Ref. 42). More information on contributor to youth and young adult
cessation among people who smoke this topic can be found throughout this initiation of smoking cigarettes and
cigarettes and decreased initiation document. other combusted tobacco products. In
among people who do not smoke In addition, we conducted sensitivity section IV.A of this document, we
cigarettes. The experts’ parameter analyses to assess the impact of specific summarize evidence from multiple
estimates fell within a broad range, data input assumptions, including those study designs, incorporating findings
although the updated estimates were related to baseline trends in from experimental and laboratory-based
often somewhat more consistent and noncombusted product use, studies, clinical trials, and pre-clinical
found greater effects from the potential noncombusted product mortality risk, research that illustrate the role that
policy than in the original elicitation. In dual product use mortality risk, and nicotine plays in facilitating initiation of
general, estimates of the effects of a switching to non-covered combusted and addiction to cigarettes and other
nicotine product standard on use products. Specifically, we conducted combusted tobacco products. As
behaviors such as smoking cessation, sensitivity analyses to examine the discussed in section IV.B of this
product switching, and smoking impact of increased initiation of document, scientific research
initiation were greater in magnitude in noncombusted tobacco product use demonstrates that adolescence is a
the 2018 expert elicitation than in the among those who would otherwise not period of development when
previous 2015 elicitation. For example, have used tobacco; the impact of an individuals who experiment with
the median estimates of smoking increase in switching from cigarettes to tobacco products are more susceptible
cessation were 36 percent in the first noncombusted tobacco product use; the to developing nicotine dependence and
year following implementation of a impact of a varying mortality risk progressing to regular use of such
nicotine product standard and 34 associated with dual use of cigarettes products. Indeed, almost 90 percent of
percent in subsequent years in the 2018 and noncombusted tobacco products; adults who currently and regularly
elicitation, compared to 25 and 22 the impact of lower and higher smoke initiated smoking by age 18, and
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00049 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5080 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
98 percent initiated smoking by age 26, dependence and progression to regular research suggests that even infrequent
which is notable given that 25 is the use. experimentation can lead to early signs
approximate age at which the brain has Nicotine is a highly addictive of dependence, which underscores the
completed development (Refs. 1 and 17 substance, and multiple studies have public health importance of decreasing
to 19). The developing brain is more shown that symptoms of nicotine the likelihood of cigarette
vulnerable to developing nicotine dependence can arise early after youth experimentation among youth and
dependence than the adult brain is, and start smoking cigarettes, even among young adults in the United States.
the earlier an individual begins smoking people who infrequently use the
If this proposed rule is finalized,
the less likely they are to quit (Ref. 20). products (Refs. 24, 93, and 553).
cigarettes and the other combusted
Compounding this are the findings Although the majority of adolescents
tobacco products covered would be
described in section IV.C of this who smoke daily meet the criteria for
rendered minimally addictive or
document that demonstrate that many nicotine dependence, one study found
youth and adults who smoke want to that the most susceptible youth lose nonaddictive, thereby breaking the link
quit smoking but have difficulty doing autonomy (i.e., independence in their between experimentation, nicotine
so. Further, the scientific literature on actions) regarding tobacco within 1 or 2 dependence, and progression to regular
relapse in those who try to quit confirms days of first inhaling from a cigarette use. As a result, FDA expects a
the powerful addictive properties of (Ref. 93). Another study found that 19.4 significant reduction in youth initiation
nicotine in tobacco products, a principal percent of adolescents (initially aged and progression to regular cigarette
factor limiting a person who smokes’ 12–13 years and followed over 6 years) smoking and use of other combusted
ability to quit, and further underscores who smoked weekly were dependent on tobacco products, which would
the public health importance of nicotine (Ref. 95). In a study regarding ultimately protect youth from a lifetime
decreasing the addictiveness of these nicotine dependence among adolescents of addiction, disease, and premature
products, particularly to reduce who recently initiated smoking (9th and death attributable to combusted tobacco
susceptibility to addiction for youth and 10th grade students), adolescents who use. To the extent that youth and young
young adults who experiment with smoked cigarettes at the lowest levels adults in the United States who would
smoking. In this section, we discuss (i.e., smoking on only 1 to 3 days of the have initiated use of cigarettes and other
how, given this scientific evidence, as past 30 days) experienced nicotine combusted tobacco products covered by
well as the findings from our population dependence symptoms such as loss of the scope of this proposed rule do not
health model, FDA expects the control over smoking (42 percent) and initiate with such tobacco products, the
proposed nicotine product standard for irritability after not smoking for a while proposed standard would prevent future
cigarettes and certain other combusted (23 percent) (Ref. 96). Researchers in a cigarette- and combusted tobacco
tobacco products would decrease 4-year study of 6th grade students also product-related disease and death.
experimentation and progression to found that ‘‘[e]ach of the nicotine
Findings from FDA’s population
regular use of these products among withdrawal symptoms appeared in some
health model, previously described in
people who currently do not use these subjects prior to daily smoking’’ (Ref.
section VIII.A of this document and in
products. 93) (emphasis added). Ten percent of
the docket (Ref. 42), estimate the
Data from the 2023 NSDUH found the study participants showed signs of
likelihood that youth and young adults
that, in the United States, approximately tobacco dependence within 1 or 2 days
who do not smoke would initiate
452,000 youth (ages 12–17) smoked of first inhaling from a cigarette, and
their first cigarette and approximately half had done so by the time they were regular cigarette smoking use under the
245,000 youth tried a cigar for the first smoking seven cigarettes per month proposed standard. Table 2 provides an
time during 2023 (Ref. 86 Table A.13A). (Ref. 93). Moreover, nicotine can disrupt estimated projection of the cumulative
The 2023 NSDUH also found that brain development and have long-term number of youth and young adults who
approximately 945,000 young adults consequences for executive cognitive would not initiate regular cigarette use
(ages 18 to 25) initiated with cigarettes functioning (e.g., decreased attention as a result of implementation of this
and 1,065,000 young adults initiated and working memory and increased proposed product standard over time
with cigars in 2021 (Ref. 552 see Table impulsivity) and increases the risk of (Ref. 42 Appendix J for annual
4.7B). Additionally, nearly 90 percent of developing a substance use disorder and estimates). Since a sustained decrease in
U.S. adults who currently smoke various mental health problems— smoking initiation rates is expected, the
cigarettes daily report having smoked particularly affective disorders such as cumulative number of people dissuaded
their first cigarette by age 18 (Ref. 1). anxiety and depression—as an adult from initiating smoking would continue
Given that nicotine is highly addictive (Refs. 554 to 556). Therefore, to increase over time. By 2100, we
and present in all cigarettes and cigars, progressing to regular use during estimate that, as a result of this
as people who experiment with adolescence can have lasting proposed nicotine product standard,
cigarettes and cigars continue to use consequences and signs of nicotine over 47 million youth and young adults
these products, there is a substantial dependence are evident in youth who who would have otherwise initiated
risk of the development of nicotine smoke cigarettes. Taken together, this smoking would not start smoking.
TABLE 2—PROJECTED CUMULATIVE NUMBER OF YOUTH AND YOUNG ADULTS WHO WOULD NOT INITIATE SMOKING AS A
RESULT OF A NICOTINE PRODUCT STANDARD IMPLEMENTED IN 2027
[Millions]
Year Median (5th, 95th percentiles)
2028 ......................................................................................................................................................... 1.3 (0.4, 1.7)
2030 ......................................................................................................................................................... 2.6 (0.7, 3.4)
2040 ......................................................................................................................................................... 8.6 (2.3, 11.5)
2050 ......................................................................................................................................................... 14.8 (4.0, 19.8)
2060 ......................................................................................................................................................... 21.1 (5.6, 28.3)
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00050 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5081
TABLE 2—PROJECTED CUMULATIVE NUMBER OF YOUTH AND YOUNG ADULTS WHO WOULD NOT INITIATE SMOKING AS A
RESULT OF A NICOTINE PRODUCT STANDARD IMPLEMENTED IN 2027—Continued
[Millions]
Year Median (5th, 95th percentiles)
2070 ......................................................................................................................................................... 27.5 (7.3, 37.0)
2080 ......................................................................................................................................................... 34.1 (9.1, 45.9)
2090 ......................................................................................................................................................... 40.8 (10.8, 54.9)
2100 ......................................................................................................................................................... 47.6 (12.6, 64.1)
For these reasons, FDA expects that use of other potentially less harmful received LNC cigarettes used alternative
establishing a maximum limit of the tobacco products. combusted and noncombusted tobacco
nicotine content in cigarettes and As discussed in section IV of this products on a statistically significantly
certain other combusted tobacco document, the scientific evidence is higher percentage of days compared to
products, as described in this proposed clear that nicotine is an addictive those who received NNC cigarettes (Ref.
rule, would reduce the likelihood that chemical and is the primary constituent 5). Another analysis of switching
youth and young adults would initiate that causes and maintains addiction to behavior in the context of a clinical
with and progress to regular cigarette cigarettes and other combusted tobacco study examined the influence of LNC
smoking and use of other combusted products. The U.S. Surgeon General has cigarette use on alternative tobacco
tobacco products, thereby protecting concluded that there is a causal product use in participants who did not
many youth and young adults from a relationship between smoking and smoke cigarettes daily. Among
lifetime of addiction and disease, and addiction to nicotine (Ref. 1), and the participants who did not use e-cigarettes
premature death, attributable to the use earlier that individuals begin smoking, at baseline, new use of e-cigarettes was
of combusted tobacco (see section VIII.D the less likely they are to successfully statistically significantly more prevalent
of this document for a discussion of life quit (Ref. 27). FDA expects that, if this in the LNC cigarette group compared to
years gained and other public health proposed rule is finalized, many people the NNC cigarette group (Ref. 377). Both
benefits as a result of decreased who smoke cigarettes will either quit findings suggest that people who smoke
initiation). Thus, from the expected smoking entirely, switch to a cigarettes, and do not quit tobacco use
impact on people who would not noncombusted tobacco product entirely, altogether, are likely to seek alternative
initiate smoking cigarettes, especially or transition to dual use. As discussed sources of nicotine once a nicotine
previously, those who switch product standard for combusted tobacco
youth and young adults, this proposed
completely to a noncombusted product products is in place.
product standard is appropriate for the
may sustain their nicotine dependence As discussed in section VII.B.2 of this
protection of public health.
but would significantly reduce their risk document, numerous studies have
C. The Likelihood That Existing Users of tobacco-related death and disease to investigated the effects of VLNC or LNC
Would Reduce Cigarette and Other the extent that the products they switch cigarettes—alone or in combination
Combusted Tobacco Product to result in less harm. That is, while with NRT products—on smoking
Consumption or Stop Smoking dependence on any tobacco product cessation among people who smoke
remains a health concern, the vast cigarettes and are interested in quitting
In addition to the long-term public majority of tobacco-related cancer, lung (Refs. 32, 35, 41, 369 to 373), as well as
health benefits that would accrue from disease, and heart disease is due to among samples of people who smoke
the prevention of cigarette smoking and exposure to constituents of tobacco cigarettes and are not interested in
other combusted tobacco use among smoke (Ref. 323). Switching completely quitting (Refs. 31, 40, 258, and 374).
youth and young adults, FDA to a noncombusted tobacco product Taken together, results from these
anticipates that the proposed standard would reduce exposure to the chemical studies demonstrate that people who
also would increase the likelihood that constituents created through smoke cigarettes and are interested in
many people who currently smoke combustion (Ref. 8). quitting who are given VLNC cigarettes
cigarettes and certain other combusted There are multiple sources of are more likely to achieve initial
tobacco products would stop smoking evidence to inform FDA’s analysis of smoking abstinence compared to those
altogether, yielding health benefits from how the proposed standard would affect who continue to smoke their usual
smoking cessation. FDA expects that the the likelihood that people who smoke brand or NNC cigarettes. In addition,
proposed standard would result in would reduce cigarette and combusted provision of NRT and/or behavioral
substantial changes in tobacco use tobacco product consumption or stop intervention with VLNC cigarettes can
patterns among people who currently smoking altogether. Findings from further increase smoking cessation
use tobacco. Given that tobacco clinical studies offer insight into among individuals interested in quitting
products are addictive primarily due to tobacco product switching, as well as (Ref. 19).
the presence of nicotine, FDA expects cigarette smoking cessation behaviors Estimates from FDA’s population
that the proposed standard would lead occurring following the implementation health model—described in section
many people who currently smoke of the proposed product standard. As VIII.A of this document—indicate that
cigarettes and certain other combusted described previously in section VI.B of in the first year following the
tobacco products to: (1) quit using these this document, a clinical trial intended implementation of the proposed
tobacco products altogether, (2) to assess the use of noncombusted and standard in 2027, smoking prevalence
transition to dual use of cigarettes or non-cigarette combusted tobacco would decline from 9.1 percent in the
other combusted tobacco products with products among participants baseline scenario to a median of 4.5
other potentially less harmful tobacco randomized to receive LNC and NNC percent in the product standard
products, or (3) transition completely to cigarettes found that participants who scenario, due to the large increase in
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00051 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5082 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
smoking cessation in the first year after cigarettes are estimated to either quit million within 5 years after the
implementation. In subsequent years, tobacco altogether or switch from implementation of the proposed
the difference in smoking prevalence cigarette smoking to using standard, representing a gain of more
between the scenarios would continue noncombusted tobacco products, than the 7.3 million people who quit
to grow due to sustained increases in signifying a considerable gain over the smoking than would be anticipated
cessation and decreases in initiation estimated 1.6 million people who smoke under the baseline scenario. The median
relative to baseline. The projected that would have quit under the baseline
estimates grow closer to the 95th
smoking prevalence drops to 0.2 percent scenario. The mortality risk of switching
percentile estimates than to the 5th
under the product standard scenario by is greater than quitting all tobacco
percentile estimates over time. A closer
2050, compared to 5.3 percent under products, therefore the public health
analysis of this pattern indicates that the
baseline. By 2100, smoking prevalence model assumes the risk for people who
5th percentile estimates are affected by
is estimated at 0.2 percent in the switch to noncombusted products as 8
lower estimates given by two experts in
product standard scenario, compared to percent higher than the risk for those
the expert elicitation. Those estimates
4.6 percent under baseline. Estimates of who quit tobacco use entirely based on
indicate that a lower percentage of
the projected cumulative number of evidence in the literature (Ref. 557), see
people who quit smoking are depicted section VIII.D of this document for a people who currently use cigarettes will
in table 3. Within the first year of the more detailed discussion. The number quit smoking cigarettes, following a
proposed standard implementation, 12.9 of additional people who quit smoking nicotine product standard’s
million additional people who smoke would increase to approximately 19.5 implementation.
TABLE 3—CUMULATIVE NET PEOPLE WHO QUIT SMOKING1 (MILLIONS) AS A RESULT OF A NICOTINE PRODUCT STANDARD
IMPLEMENTED IN 2027
Period Median (5th, 95th percentiles)
Within 1st year (2027) ............................................................................................................................. 12.9 (0.8, 24.8)
Within 2 years (2027–2028) .................................................................................................................... 17.5 (1.2, 24.1)
Within 3 years (2027–2029) .................................................................................................................... 19.3 (1.6, 23.2)
Within 4 years (2027–2030) .................................................................................................................... 19.8 (1.8, 22.3)
Within 5 years (2027–2031) .................................................................................................................... 219.5 (2.0, 21.4)
1Net people who quit smoking cigarettes (including those who switch to noncombusted tobacco products), defined as people who quit smoking
cigarettes in addition to baseline, is computed as: (number of people who quit smoking cigarettes under the nicotine product standard scenario)
¥ (number of people who quit smoking cigarettes under baseline scenario).
2Cumulative net people who quit smoking declines slightly in year 5 of the simulation because there are more people who quit smoking ciga-
rettes in the baseline scenario compared with the product standard scenario. Since there are millions of fewer people smoking cigarettes in the
product standard scenario as the years continue, eventually there are fewer people available to quit smoking cigarettes compared to baseline.
We also examined the potential for an analyses demonstrate that increasing the under the proposed nicotine standard,
illicit market for NNC cigarettes to assumed proportion of people who resulted in reductions in the projected
develop in response to the proposed smoke who may divert to the use of cumulative net people who quit
product standard (see section IX.D of illicit NNC cigarettes (for purposes of smoking following the implementation
this document for a discussion on illicit illustration, we use a low-end estimate of the nicotine product standard policy
trade). In order to examine the potential (3.8 percent), a midpoint estimate (5.9 (table 4). However, even in the case of
impact of such an illicit market, percent), and a high-end estimate (21.0 significant diversion to illicit NNC
sensitivity analyses were conducted for percent)),31and allowing youth and
cigarettes, the number of people
the effects of diversion from cessation to young adults (who would have
projected to quit smoking remains
illicit trade, and initiation into illicit otherwise initiated NNC cigarette use) to
substantial.
products, on the estimated benefits of a initiate into illicit NNC cigarette use (0
nicotine product standard. These percent, 2.6 percent, and 10 percent)32
31We use 3.8 percent as a low-end estimate based percent as a high-end estimate based on the needed, which is highly unlikely. We also note that
on 2017 estimates of illicit trade volume in difference in non-compliance rates between basing a high-end estimate on non-compliance rates
cigarettes from (Ref. 558). This estimate excludes reduced nicotine intervention groups (78 percent) found in studies (where NNC cigarettes are legally
interstate smuggling for purposes of tax avoidance. and control groups assigned to NNC cigarettes (57 available outside the confines of the study
For a midpoint estimate, using findings from the percent) in clinical trial data from (Ref. 29, Ref. environment) is not equivalent to real-world
International Tobacco Control United States Survey 330). This estimate of 21.0 percent also represents conditions where NNC cigarettes would not be
(Ref. 559), we estimate that 5.9 percent of U.S. the high-end of the range estimated in (Ref. 560), legally available in the U.S. marketplace.
people who use cigarettes last purchased cigarettes which reflected the methodology of the pack return 32We use findings from an expert elicitation
from low-tax locations. We use these figures as survey by (Ref. 561). While FDA uses this 21.0 developed to gauge the impact of a menthol
proxies for the proportions of people who use percent high-end estimate for the purpose of cigarette and cigar prohibition in the United States
cigarettes who may actively seek out illicit NNC analyzing potential impacts, we note that it (Ref. 562), which indicates that among people ages
cigarettes under a nicotine product standard, represents a highly unlikely upper bound, because 12–24 who would have otherwise initiated menthol
although we note that the product standard would for such a substantial percentage of people who use cigarette use, 2.6 percent would initiate illicit
be implemented nationwide, avoiding disparate cigarettes to acquire NNC cigarettes, convenient and menthol cigarette use (estimate ranged from 0
pricing/availability between states. We use 21.0 consistent access to an illicit market would be percent to 10 percent).
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00052 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5083
TABLE 4—CUMULATIVE NET PEOPLE WHO QUIT SMOKING COMBUSTED CIGARETTES (MILLIONS) AS A RESULT OF A NICO-
TINE PRODUCT STANDARD IMPLEMENTED IN 2027 UNDER ILLICIT TRADE SCENARIOS. MEDIAN (5TH, 95TH PERCENT-
ILES) ESTIMATES
Illicit trade impact scenarios
Period
Main scenario
Low Impact1 Medium Impact2 High Impact3
(no impact)
Within 1st year (2027) ............................................................. 12.9 (0.8, 24.8) 12.4 (0.7, 24.6) 12.1 (0.7, 24.4) 9.9 (0.3, 22.6)
Within 5th year (2027–2031) ................................................... 19.5 (2.0, 21.4) 19.3 (1.7, 21.3) 19.2 (1.5, 21.4) 18.1 (0.3, 21.4)
1Low Impact: 3.8 percent people who smoke would divert to use illicit NNC cigarettes, and 0 percent youth and young adults would initiate il-
licit NNC cigarettes.
2Medium Impact: 5.9 percent people who smoke would divert to use illicit NNC cigarettes, and 2.6 percent youth and young adults would ini-
tiate illicit NNC cigarettes.
3High Impact: 21.0 percent people who smoke would divert to use illicit NNC cigarettes, and 10.0 percent youth and young adults would ini-
tiate illicit NNC cigarettes.
The sum of the available evidence— product standard that would seek to nicotine product standard in cigarettes
including the current use of cigarettes limit the nicotine content in cigarettes and certain other combusted tobacco
by millions of Americans, findings from and certain other combusted tobacco products on preventing youth, young
studies assessing the effects of VLNC or products to minimally addictive or adult, and even adults who have never
LNC cigarettes on smoking cessation, nonaddictive levels, FDA anticipates smoked from initiating/experimenting
and findings from FDA’s population that reductions in population harm and progressing to regular cigarette
health model—supports FDA’s finding would be realized through long-term smoking will have a population health
that the proposed product standard health benefits resulting from benefit. Youth and young adults would
would increase the likelihood that many prevention of cigarette uptake and experience the greatest benefits from a
people who smoke cigarettes and/or progression to regular cigarette smoking nicotine product standard, because it is
other combusted tobacco products among young people, as well as shorter- likely that most of them would not
would stop smoking altogether, yielding term health benefits resulting from progress beyond experimentation or
significant health benefits from smoking increased cessation of cigarette smoking occasional use and, therefore, may not
cessation. Additionally, we find that the among people who currently smoke. experience the dangerous and deadly
proposed standard is appropriate for the Each of these impacts alone would tobacco-related health effects associated
protection of the public health because result in significant health benefits to with combusted tobacco product use.
it would decrease the likelihood that the U.S. population. In totality, they Fetuses and children also would benefit
people who do not smoke cigarettes provide overwhelming evidence that the if their parents quit smoking or using
and/or use certain other combusted proposed standard would result in most combusted tobacco products, given
tobacco products—particularly youth substantial health benefits over both the the negative health consequences to the
and young adults—who experiment short- and long-term. In this section, we fetus of a smoking mother and the
with combusted tobacco products will summarize the health benefits of never dangers of secondhand smoke (Ref. 19).
become addicted to these products, progressing to regular cigarette smoking Children of parents who smoke, when
thereby decreasing progression to and combusted tobacco product use, the compared with children whose parents
regular use, resulting in reduced health benefits of quitting smoking, the do not smoke, have an increased
tobacco-related morbidity and mortality population health benefits of switching frequency of respiratory infections like
associated with combusted tobacco from cigarettes to potentially less pneumonia and bronchitis (Ref. 563).
product use. As of 2021, more than 48 harmful tobacco products, and the Smoking cessation reduces the rates of
million people in the United States ages health benefits of not being exposed to these respiratory symptoms and of
12 and older used tobacco products secondhand smoke. We also describe respiratory infections among children
within the past 30 days (Refs. 25 and additional public health benefits of the (Ref. 63 at p. 467). Children exposed to
274). Further, in 2021, 35.6 million U.S. proposed standard not addressed in tobacco smoke in the home also are
adults (14.5 percent) and nearly 1 FDA’s population health model. Finally, more likely to develop acute otitis
million middle and high school we describe potential risks or limiting media (middle ear infections) and
students (3.2 percent) used any effects of the product standard, persistent middle ear effusions (thick or
combustible tobacco product (Ref. 274). including risks of compensatory sticky fluid behind the eardrum) (Ref.
Thus, even small changes in initiation smoking. Based on the available 563). If parents were more readily able
and cessation would result in a evidence, FDA concludes that any such to quit because these products were
significant reduction in the burden of potential risks or limiting effects would minimally addictive or nonaddictive,
death and disease caused by smoking. be significantly outweighed by the the incidence of these health problems
anticipated substantial benefits of this among youth would be expected to
D. Benefits and Risks to the Population
proposed nicotine product standard. decline. Additionally, such health
as a Whole
problems would not occur in future
1. Given the Harmful Effects of Cigarette
We expect that the proposed nicotine years, as fewer individuals would
Smoking and Combusted Tobacco Use,
product standard, if finalized, would initiate and progress to regular smoking.
Never Progressing to Regular Smoking
reduce tobacco-related harms. As According to the 2014 Surgeon
Prevents Death and Disease and
discussed in section IV of this General’s Report, which summarizes
Improves Quality of Life
document, nicotine is the primary thousands of peer-reviewed scientific
constituent in cigarettes and other Never progressing to regular cigarette studies and is itself peer-reviewed,
tobacco products that causes and smoking prevents death and disease smoking remains the leading
maintains addiction. By enacting a caused by smoking. Any effects of a preventable cause of disease and death
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00053 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5084 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
in the United States, and cigarettes have other racial and ethnic groups (Refs. from tobacco, the substantial reductions
been shown to cause an ever-expanding 105, 106, 108 to 110, and 123). in smoking initiation and increases in
number of diseases and health Moreover, when comparing mortality smoking cessation will result in
conditions (Ref. 1). As stated in the to morbidity, for every person who dies improvements in quality of life for those
report, ‘‘cigarette smoking has been from smoking, 30 more are living with who quit or do not initiate smoking
causally linked to disease of nearly all a smoking-attributable disease (Ref. 1). because of the product standard. To
organs of the body, to diminished health Smoking is causally associated with a estimate the potential impact of the
status, and to harm to the fetus’’ and number of diseases affecting nearly all proposed standard on morbidity and
organs in the body, such as numerous
‘‘[t]he burden of death and disease from mortality, we used estimates from FDA’s
types of cancer, heart disease, stroke,
tobacco use in the United States is population health model, which is
lung diseases such as COPD, and
overwhelmingly caused by cigarettes described in section VIII.A of this
diabetes, in addition to putting
and other combusted tobacco products’’ document. Table 5 presents cumulative
individuals at increased risk for
(Ref. 1). The 2014 Surgeon General’s estimates of mortality and morbidity
tuberculosis, certain eye diseases, and
Report estimates that 16 million people immune system issues (Ref. 1). One avoided as a result of the proposed
live with diseases caused by smoking study estimated that individuals in the nicotine product standard, for certain
cigarettes (Ref. 1). Additionally, the United States have had 14.0 million years in the simulation period (Ref. 42
at Appendix J). By 2060, we estimate
burden of tobacco-related addiction and major smoking-attributable medical
that approximately 1.8 million deaths
disease disproportionately impacts conditions, including more than 7.4
due to tobacco would be avoided, rising
certain populations, such as individuals million cases of COPD, nearly 2.3
to 4.3 million by the end of the century.
experiencing poverty, those of lower million heart attacks, 1.8 million cases
The reduction in premature deaths
educational attainment, in historically of diabetes, nearly 1.2 million stroke
attributable to the proposed product
marginalized racial and ethnic groups, events, more than 300,000 cases of lung
standard would result in 19.6 million
in the LGBTQI+ community, people cancer, and nearly 1 million cases of
living with a mental health condition, in other smoking-attributable cancers life years gained by 2060 and 76.4
the military, and in certain geographic (bladder, cervix, colon/rectum, kidney, million life years gained by 2100. Based
larynx, mouth, tongue, lip, throat, on previously reported quality of life
areas (Ref. 120). In particular, Black
pharynx, stomach) (Ref. 564). Therefore, scores derived for people who do and
individuals experience the highest rates
increased smoking cessation, reduced do not smoke, stratified by age group
of incidence and mortality from
cigarette consumption, and lower (Ref. 565), we estimate that the
tobacco-related cancers compared to
progression to regular use would reduce proposed nicotine product standard
people from other racial and ethnic
not only the mortality from smoking, would result in 24.0 million QALYs
groups (Refs. 102 and 103). but also the enormous burden of gained by 2060 due to reduced smoking
Additionally, mortality related to other cigarette-attributable disease in the morbidity. By 2100, this estimate is
tobacco-related diseases such as heart United States. projected to increase to 53.1 million
disease, stroke, and hypertension is In addition to the years of life gained QALYs gained due to reduced smoking
higher among Black individuals than due to reduced premature mortality morbidity (Ref. 42 at Section 2.3).
TABLE 5—PROJECTED NUMBER OF TOBACCO-ATTRIBUTABLE DEATHS AVOIDED, LIFE YEARS GAINED, AND QALYS GAINED
DUE TO REDUCED SMOKING AS A RESULT OF A NICOTINE PRODUCT STANDARD IMPLEMENTED IN 2027
Cumulative
Cumulative to-
Cumulative life QALYs gained
bacco-attributable
Year Scenario years gained due to reduced
deaths avoided
(millions) smoking morbidity
(millions)
(millions)
2040 ......................................................................................... Median (5th, 95th) 0.4 (0.1, 0.5) 2.0 (0.2, 2.7) 9.6 (2.7, 10.0)
2060 ......................................................................................... Median (5th, 95th) 1.8 (0.4, 2.0) 19.6 (3.6, 22.7) 24.0 (10.1, 24.7)
2080 ......................................................................................... Median (5th, 95th) 3.1 (1.0, 3.4) 47.4 (12.5, 52.5) 38.2 (18.5, 39.2)
2100 ......................................................................................... Median (5th, 95th) 4.3 (1.6, 4.6) 76.4 (26.5, 82.5) 53.1 (27.5, 54.4)
In addition to the main analyses mortality rate projections; and the proportion being people who use
concerning projected death and potential impact of a substantial illicit noncombusted tobacco products.
disability, we examined the sensitivity market for NNC cigarettes. Changes to In terms of mortality risk, we applied
of modeled results to underlying baseline inputs of noncombusted a relative risk of 1.18 for people who use
assumptions related to baseline product product use trajectories and health risks noncombusted tobacco products as
use projections and mortality risk had minimal impact on smoking compared with people who have never
estimates. Sensitivity analyses prevalence and attributable morbidity smoked (i.e., the risk of death associated
accounted for the following: an increase with noncombusted tobacco use is
and mortality, and the nicotine product
in noncombusted product initiation; assumed to be 1.18 times greater than
standard still resulted in substantial
different assumptions of people who the risk of death associated with never
public health benefits. Assuming
smoke switching to noncombusted smoking). For combusted cigarette
increasing initiation rates for
products per year; decrease in smoking smoking, the relative mortality risk
noncombusted product use until year
initiation; lower and higher varies with age, but is generally around
2030 implies that the number of people
noncombusted product mortality risk 2.5, as compared to people who have
who use tobacco will be higher under
compared to baseline; different never smoked (i.e., the risk of death
the baseline and nicotine product
assumptions for dual product use associated with smoking is estimated to
standard scenarios, with a higher
mortality risk; changes in baseline be 2.5 times greater than the risk of
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00054 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5085
death associated with never smoking). product used, can be calculated by modeling projections, we apply an
Mortality risk for people who have subtracting 1 from the mortality risk excess risk of using noncombusted
never used tobacco is 1, so the excess (i.e., excess mortality risk for tobacco products that is 12 percent that
mortality risk of using a product beyond noncombusted tobacco use is 1.18¥1 = of the excess risk associated with
that of those who have never used 0.18, and for combusted cigarette use it cigarette smoking (i.e., 100 × (0.18/1.5)
tobacco, and therefore related to the is 2.5¥1=1.5). Thus, in our main = 12 percent).
TABLE 6—IMPACT OF VARYING BASELINE ASSUMPTIONS ON PROJECTED SMOKING PREVALENCE AND AVOIDED MORTALITY
AND MORBIDITY BY 2100. MEDIAN (5TH, 95TH PERCENTILES) ESTIMATES
Projections through year 2100
Cumulative Cumulative
Scenario Cigarette smoking tobacco-attrib- Cumulative QALYs gained
prevalence utable mortality life years gained from reduced
(%) avoided (millions) smoking morbidity
(millions) (millions)
Main scenario .......................................................................... 0.2 (0.1, 1.9) 4.3 (1.6, 4.6) 76.4 (26.5, 82.5) 53.1 (27.5, 54.4)
Baseline noncombusted tobacco product trajectory
Increased noncombusted initiation .......................................... 0.2 (0.1, 1.9) 4.3 (1.6, 4.6) 76.5 (26.7, 82.5) 53.1 (27.5, 54.4)
50% increased complete switching ......................................... 0.13 (0.06, 1.7) 4.2 (1.7, 4.5) 74.9 (28.6, 80.7) 51.9 (29.0, 52.9)
100% increased complete switching ....................................... 0.12 (0.06, 1.5) 4.2 (1.8, 4.4) 73.6 (30.3, 79.0) 50.8 (30.2, 51.6)
Baseline smoking initiation trajectory
25% decrease in smoking initiation during the period 2021–
2030 ..................................................................................... 0.13 (0.1, 1.6) 4.1 (1.5, 4.4) 72.9 (24.3, 79.0) 45.2 (22.9, 46.4)
Baseline smoking cessation
10% increase in smoking cessation ........................................ 0.15 (0.1, 1.8) 4.0 (1.5, 4.3) 70.9 (24.9, 76.4) 50.1 (26.3, 51.2)
Baseline noncombusted mortality relative risk (RR)
Higher RR than main scenario (RR = 1.3) .............................. 0.2 (0.1, 1.9) 4.3 (1.6, 4.6) 75.0 (26.0, 81.4) 53.1 (27.5, 54.4)
Lower RR than main scenario (RR = 1.1)............................... 0.2 (0.1, 1.9) 4.4 (1.6, 4.7) 77.2 (26.9, 83.2) 53.1 (27.5, 54.4)
Baseline dual use RR
Dual use RR is 18% greater than for cigarette smoking ........ 0.2 (0.1, 1.9) 4.3 (1.6, 4.6) 75.9 (25.0, 82.4) 53.1 (27.5, 54.4)
Dual use RR is the average of cigarette and noncombusted
use RR ................................................................................. 0.2 (0.1, 1.9) 4.3 (1.6, 4.6) 77.0 (28.6, 82.6) 53.1 (27.5, 54.4)
Dual use RR is equal to the noncombusted use RR .............. 0.2 (0.1, 1.9) 4.3 (1.6, 4.6) 77.6 (30.7, 82.7) 53.1 (27.5, 54.4)
Baseline mortality rate projections
Keep mortality rates constant starting at 2060 ....................... 0.2 (0.1, 2.0) 4.7 (1.9, 5.1) 77.9 (28.2, 83.9) 53.0 (27.4, 54.2)
As shown in table 6, varying baseline changes in differences in life years maintaining the median of the expert-
input parameter values had very small gained. Additional details regarding the derived values for the other parameters
effects on estimates of the potential sensitivity analyses can be found in (Ref. 42 at Section 2.3). Given the wide
population health effects of a nicotine FDA’s modeling document (Ref. 42). variation in the expert-derived cessation
product standard. Assuming a 25 Sensitivity analyses were also rates, the projected health impacts
percent decrease in cigarette smoking conducted examining assumptions assuming a two-fold increase in
initiation during the period from 2021 about the potential effect of the nicotine cessation fell within the range of results
to 2030 resulted in modest decreases in product standard on smoking cessation. obtained from expert-derived inputs
smoking prevalence and health benefits, In addition to the modeling results (see table 6).
in particular reductions in morbidity obtained through expert-derived inputs, Additionally, increasing the assumed
proportion of people who smoke who
due to smoking, by 2100 in the policy we also generated projections based on
may divert to the use of illicit NNC
scenario compared to the main analysis. results from clinical studies of VLNC
cigarettes (3.8 percent, 5.9 percent, and Increases in baseline complete cigarette use and cessation. Based on
21.0 percent),33and allowing youth and
switching to noncombusted tobacco these studies, we applied a two-fold
product use resulted in similar small increase in cessation (estimates ranged
33We use 3.8 percent as a low-end estimate based
decreases in smoking prevalence and from 6.4 percent to 19.8 percent), as on 2017 estimates of illicit trade volume in
health benefits in terms of life years compared to the baseline cessation rate cigarettes from Euromonitor International (Ref.
gained and reduced smoking morbidity (estimates ranged from 3.2 percent to 9.9 558). This estimate excludes interstate smuggling
by 2100 compared to the main analysis. percent), as an alternative estimate of for purposes of tax avoidance. Using findings from
the International Tobacco Control United States
Different assumptions about baseline the long-term impact of the proposed
Survey, we estimate that 5.9 percent of U.S. people
relative risks also produced modest product standard on cessation, while Continued
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00055 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5086 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
young adults (who would have cumulative attributable morbidity and product standard, even in a scenario in
otherwise initiated NNC cigarette use) to mortality outcomes following the which greater proportions of the
initiate into illicit NNC cigarette use (0 implementation of the policy (table 7). population who smoke are assumed to
percent, 2.6 percent, and 10 percent)34 It is noteworthy that significant benefits divert to use of illicit NNC cigarettes.
under the proposed nicotine standard in terms of reduced morbidity and
resulted in reductions in the projected mortality are realized as a result of this
TABLE 7—PROJECTED HEALTH BENEFITS AS A RESULT OF A NICOTINE PRODUCT STANDARD IMPLEMENTED IN 2027
UNDER ILLICIT TRADE SCENARIOS
[Median (5th, 95th percentiles) estimates]
Illicit trade impact scenarios
Year
Main scenario
Low impact1 Medium impact2 High impact3
(no impact)
Tobacco-Attributable Deaths Avoided (Millions)
2040 ......................................................................................... 0.4 (0.1, 0.5) 0.4 (0.04, 0.5) 0.4 (0.04, 0.5) 0.4 (0.01, 0.5)
2060 ......................................................................................... 1.8 (0.4, 2.0) 1.8 (0.4, 2.0) 1.8 (0.3, 2.0) 1.7 (0.1, 2.0)
2080 ......................................................................................... 3.1 (1.0, 3.4) 3.1 (0.8, 3.4) 3.1 (0.8, 3.4) 3.0 (0.4, 3.3)
2100 ......................................................................................... 4.3 (1.6, 4.6) 4.3 (1.5, 4.6) 4.3 (1.4, 4.6) 4.2 (0.9, 4.5)
Cumulative Life Years Gained (Millions)
2040 ......................................................................................... 2.0 (0.2, 2.7) 2.0 (0.1, 2.7) 2.0 (0.1, 2.7) 1.8 (0.01, 2.6)
2060 ......................................................................................... 19.6 (3.6, 22.7) 19.4 (3.2, 22.6) 19.3 (3.0, 22.6) 18.4 (1.2, 22.0)
2080 ......................................................................................... 47.4 (12.5, 52.5) 47.1 (11.4, 52.4) 46.9 (10.7, 52.3) 45.3 (5.3, 51.5)
2100 ......................................................................................... 76.4 (26.5, 82.5) 76.0 (24.6, 82.3) 75.8 (23.4, 82.2) 73.9 (13.7, 81.3)
Cumulative QALYs Gained from Reduced Smoking Morbidity (Millions)
2040 ......................................................................................... 9.6 (2.7, 10.0) 9.6 (2.5, 10.0) 9.5 (2.4, 10.0) 9.2 (1.5, 9.9)
2060 ......................................................................................... 24.0 (10.1, 24.7) 24.0 (9.6, 24.7) 23.9 (9.2, 24.7) 23.4 (6.5, 24.6)
2080 ......................................................................................... 38.2 (18.5, 39.2) 38.2 (17.7, 39.2) 38.0 (17.0, 39.2) 37.3 (12.6, 39.0)
2100 ......................................................................................... 53.1 (27.5, 54.4) 53.0 (26.6, 54.4) 52.8 (25.5, 54.3) 51.9 (19.3, 54.1)
1Low Impact: 3.8 percent people who smoke would divert to use illicit NNC cigarettes, and 0 percent youth and young adults would initiate il-
licit NNC cigarettes.
2Medium Impact: 5.9 percent people who smoke would divert to use illicit NNC cigarettes, and 2.6 percent youth and young adults would ini-
tiate illicit NNC cigarettes.
3High Impact: 21.0 percent people who smoke would divert to use illicit NNC cigarettes, and 10.0 percent youth and young adults would ini-
tiate illicit NNC cigarettes.
As previously discussed, nicotine is 2. Given the Harmful Effects of Cigarette smoking and improving health in
the primary driver of addiction in Smoking and Other Combusted Tobacco general’’ (Ref. 63). The 2020 Surgeon
tobacco products and facilitates Product Use, Quitting Smoking Reduces General’s Report also concluded that
progression to regular cigarette smoking Death and Disease ‘‘[s]moking cessation is beneficial at any
and other regular combusted tobacco age. Smoking cessation improves health
product use. FDA anticipates that Although the health benefits are status and enhances quality of life.’’
establishing a maximum level of greater for people who stop smoking at (Ref. 19). As previously noted, FDA
earlier ages (Refs. 63 and 563), expects that, if this proposed rule is
nicotine in cigarettes and certain other
researchers estimate that people who finalized, there will be a significant
combusted tobacco products will
regularly smoke can gain years of increase in smoking cessation in the
prevent a substantial number of youth
additional life expectancy no matter U.S. population (see section VIII.C of
and young adults who experiment with
when they quit (Ref. 566). Quitting this document).
combusted tobacco products from
cigarette smoking and use of other The benefits associated with smoking
developing an addiction to these
combusted tobacco products cessation happen quickly (Ref. 63).
products, thereby decreasing
substantially reduces the likelihood of Within 2 to 12 weeks of quitting
progression to regular use, resulting in tobacco-related death and disease. As smoking, an individual’s lung function
reduced tobacco-related morbidity and stated in the 2004 Surgeon General’s and blood circulation improve (Ref. 63).
mortality associated with combusted Report, ‘‘[q]uitting smoking has During the first 1 to 9 months following
tobacco product use. immediate as well as long-term benefits, cessation, coughing and shortness of
reducing risks for diseases caused by breath decrease (Ref. 63). Within several
who use cigarettes last purchased cigarettes from difference in non-compliance rates between 34We use findings from an expert elicitation
low-tax locations (Ref. 559). We use these figures reduced nicotine intervention groups (78 percent) developed to gauge the impact of a menthol
as proxies for the proportions of people who use and control groups assigned to NNC cigarettes (57 cigarette and cigar prohibition in the United States,
cigarettes who may actively seek out illicit NNC
percent) in clinical trial data (Refs. 29 and 330). which indicates that among people ages 12–24 who
cigarettes under a nicotine product standard,
This estimate of 21 percent also represents the high- would have otherwise initiated menthol cigarette
although we note that the product standard would
end of the range estimated by the National Research use, 2.6 percent would initiate illicit menthol
be implemented nationwide, avoiding disparate
pricing/availability between states. We use 21 Council, which reflected the methodology of the cigarette use (estimate ranged from 0 percent to 10
percent as a high-end estimate based on the pack return survey by Fix, et al. (Refs. 560 and 561). percent) (Ref. 562).
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00056 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5087
months of quitting smoking, individuals attack by 50 percent (Ref. 568). For extension of 7.7 years) (Ref. 576).
can expect further improvement in lung those persons who have already Furthermore, a man aged 60–64 years
function (Ref. 63). Additionally, the developed cancer, quitting smoking who smokes 20 cigarettes (one pack) or
benefits of cessation continue for those reduces the risk of developing a second more per day and then quits smoking
who remain smoke-free. Smoking cancer (Refs 563, 570 to 572). reduces his risk of dying during the next
cessation reduces the risk of cancers and Additionally, quitting smoking after a 15 years by 10 percent (Ref. 563).
other diseases (Ref. 19). For example, diagnosis of lung cancer reduces the risk While cessation is beneficial for
the risk of fatal lung cancer in adults of cancer progression and mortality (Ref. people of all ages, the health benefits are
over age 55 is about 25 times higher 573). Researchers also estimate that for greatest for people who stop smoking at
among people who smoke cigarettes people who currently smoke and have earlier ages (Refs. 63 and 563). Scientists
relative to people who have never been diagnosed with coronary heart in the United Kingdom found that
smoked (Ref. 567). After 10–15 years of disease, quitting smoking reduces the people who quit smoking at age 30
abstinence from smoking, the risk of risk of death overall and reduces the reduce their risk of dying prematurely
lung cancer is about 50 percent of the risk of recurrent heart attacks and (i.e., dying before their expected average
risk for individuals who continue to cardiovascular death by 30 to 40 percent life expectancy) from smoking-related
smoke (Ref. 19). The risk of cancer of (Refs. 19 and 563). The 2020 Surgeon diseases by more than 90 percent (Refs.
the mouth, throat, esophagus, stomach, General’s Report concluded that quitting 544 and 577). Those who quit at age 50
bladder, cervix, pancreas, liver, kidney, smoking reduces the risk of fatal and reduce their risk of dying prematurely
colon, and rectum, and the risk of acute non-fatal stroke, and earlier reports have by 50 percent compared to those who
myeloid leukemia also decreases (Refs. also stated that it is reasonable to continue to smoke (Ref. 544). Using
19 and 568). The evidence is also assume that quitting smoking would NHIS data, researchers also estimated
sufficient to infer that the risk of stroke reduce the risk of recurrent strokes that life expectancy in the United States
decreases after smoking cessation and (Refs.19 and 563). Quitting smoking would increase by 4 years among people
approaches that of people who have helps the body tolerate the surgery and who smoke who quit at ages 55–64, and
never smoked cigarettes over time (Ref. treatments, such as chemotherapy and 10 years among people who smoke who
569). Furthermore, the evidence is radiation, associated with certain quit at ages 25–34 (Ref. 566). Scientists
sufficient to infer that the relative risk smoking-related diseases, and quitting using the CPS–II data (while accounting
of coronary heart disease among people also improves the likelihood of for the possibility that some people who
who formerly smoked cigarettes falls responding to those treatments (Refs. 63, currently smoke at baseline quit
rapidly after cessation and then declines 563, 570, and 574) and reduces the risk smoking and some people who formerly
more slowly (Ref. 19). of respiratory infections compared to smoked relapsed during followup)
In addition, smoking cessation
continued smoking (Refs. 563 and 575). found that even people who smoke who
substantially reduces the risk of other
Given the reduction in risk of quit at age 65 had an expected life
dangerous diseases that can lead to
smoking-related death and disease increase of 2 years for men and 3.7 years
death or disability and cause a financial
associated with cessation, those who for women (Ref. 576).
strain on healthcare resources. For
successfully quit smoking also increase The benefits continue for those who
example, quitting smoking substantially
their life expectancy. Using data from remain smoke-free. At year one, an
reduces the risk of peripheral artery
the CPS–II—an ongoing study of 1.2 individual’s risk of coronary heart
occlusive disease (which can cause
million adults—scientists have found disease becomes half that of a person
complications that lead to loss of limbs)
that, among men who smoke cigarettes, who smokes cigarettes (Refs. 219 and
(Ref. 563). It also reduces the relative
men who smoked at age 35 and 578). Beginning 2 and 5 years after
risk of coronary heart disease and stroke
continued to smoke until death had a cessation, an individual’s stroke risk is
morbidity and mortality among people
life expectancy of 69.3 years, compared reduced to that of a person who does
who formerly smoked compared with
people who have never smoked (Ref. with a life expectancy of 76.2 years for not smoke cigarettes (Refs. 19 and 578).
19). People who formerly smoked those who stopped smoking at age 35 In addition, the risk of cancers of the
cigarettes also have half the excess risk (Ref. 576). After adjusting for the mouth, throat, esophagus, and bladder
of experiencing an abdominal aortic subsequent quit rate among people who for a person who formerly smoked is
aneurysm compared to people who currently smoke cigarettes at baseline halved within 5 years (Ref. 578). By 10
currently smoke cigarettes (Ref. 563). (to account for the possibility that some years post-cessation, an individual’s risk
Furthermore, cigarette smoking people who currently smoke at baseline of cancers of the kidney and pancreas
complicates many diseases (e.g., people quit smoking or some people who decreases (Ref. 578). The risk of
who smoke and have diabetes have formerly smoked relapsed during coronary heart disease becomes that of
higher risk of complications, including followup and, thus, were incorrectly a person who does not smoke after 15
heart and kidney disease, poor blood classified as people who continue to years of abstinence (Ref. 578). FDA
flow in the legs and feet, retinopathy, smoke in the unadjusted analysis), the anticipates that limiting nicotine yield
and peripheral neuropathy), and life expectancy for males who formerly by setting a maximum level of nicotine
smoking cessation can alleviate those smoked increased to 77.8 years (a life in cigarettes and certain other
complications as well (Ref. 28). extension of 8.5 years) (Ref. 576). combusted tobacco products would
Even people who smoke and quit Women who smoked at age 35 and improve smoking cessation outcomes in
smoking after the onset of a life- continued to smoke until death had a adults who smoke and result in longer
threatening disease experience life expectancy of 73.8 years, compared life expectancies for more individuals.
significant health benefits from with a life expectancy of 79.7 years for Additionally, FDA anticipates that this
cessation. Quitting smoking after a those who stopped smoking at age 35 proposed product standard will benefit
diagnosis reduces the chance of (Ref. 576). After adjustment for the populations that use tobacco products at
recurrences and future health problems. subsequent quit rate among people who disproportionately high levels by
For example, people who quit smoking currently smoke at baseline, the life reducing tobacco-related morbidity and
after having a heart attack can reduce expectancy for females who formerly mortality by improving quitting and
their chances of having a second heart smoked increased to 81 years (a life cessation among these populations.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00057 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5088 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Research has shown that people from product standard. While most people these findings suggest that people who
specific population groups who smoke who use tobacco in these studies smoke VLNC cigarettes are likely to use
cigarettes bear a disproportionate indicated that they would continue to alternative nicotine-containing
burden of tobacco-related morbidity and smoke cigarettes—or other combusted products, if such products are
mortality. Black individuals, and in products—or simply quit tobacco use, concurrently available, once a nicotine
particular Black men, experience the some participants reported that they product standard for combusted tobacco
highest rates of incidence and mortality would switch to using or increase use of products is in place.
from tobacco-related cancers compared a noncombusted product (Refs. 262, Under FDA’s population health
to people from other racial and ethnic 264, and 587). model’s product standard scenario, an
groups (Refs. 102 and 103). One clinical trial compared use of increase in noncombusted product use
Additionally, mortality due to tobacco- NRT and alternative tobacco products would occur concurrently with a
related disease such as heart disease, (i.e., smokeless tobacco, e-cigarettes, dramatic reduction in cigarette smoking.
stroke, and hypertension is higher cigars, cigarillos) among people who Although the model assumes that
among Black individuals compared to smoke cigarettes and were randomized noncombusted product initiation would
other racial and ethnic groups (Refs. to one of three groups (Ref. 5). One remain constant until the end of the
105, 106, 108 to 110, 123, and 579). group received LNC cigarettes along projection period (i.e., 2100), the
Furthermore, individuals with with access to NRT, noncombusted product standard scenario shows that
symptoms of mental health disorders tobacco products (i.e., smokeless noncombusted use continues to climb
and persons who have substance use tobacco, e-cigarettes), and combusted due to higher switching rates from
disorders smoke cigarettes in non-cigarette products (i.e., cigars, combusted products as compared to the
disproportionately large numbers (Refs. cigarillos); a second group received LNC baseline scenario. This is because the
128, 580 to 585), resulting in increased cigarettes, and NRT, and noncombusted number of people who start using
risk for tobacco-related morbidity and tobacco products only; and a third noncombusted tobacco products would
mortality (Ref. 585). Based on these group received NNC cigarettes along be much higher compared to the
collective findings, FDA anticipates that with NRT, noncombusted tobacco number of people who quit using
the proposed product standard will products, and combusted tobacco noncombusted products. That is, there
improve smoking cessation outcomes products. Overall, those who received would be more people who currently
across the U.S. population, including the LNC cigarettes used more alternative use noncombusted tobacco products
among populations at increased risk for combusted and noncombusted tobacco every year than people who quit using
tobacco-related morbidity and mortality, products as well as NRT. These noncombusted products, which would
leading to a reduction in adverse participants also smoked fewer total cause an increase in noncombusted
tobacco-related health effects. combusted tobacco products and had a tobacco use prevalence throughout the
greater number of quit attempts. projection period. According to the
3. Given the Harmful Effects of Cigarette
Tobacco toxicant levels in participants model, adult noncombusted tobacco use
Smoking, Switching to a Potentially
who received LNC cigarettes and only would increase from 7.7 percent in the
Less Harmful Nicotine Delivery Product
NRT and noncombusted products were baseline scenario to 12.8 percent in the
May Reduce Death and Disease
statistically significantly lower than product standard scenario within 1 year
Some people who smoke and who those of participants who received NNC after policy implementation, due to the
want to quit use NRT products, or other cigarettes, while toxicant levels in those increase in switching from cigarette
smoking cessation products that do not who received LNC cigarettes and had smoking and dual use as a result of a
contain nicotine, that FDA has approved access to NRT, combusted, and nicotine product standard. The
as safe and effective for smoking noncombusted products did not differ prevalence of noncombusted tobacco
cessation. These products have been from the NNC cigarette group (Ref. 5). use would remain higher in the product
shown to significantly increase the Findings demonstrate that when people standard scenario over time due both to
success of smoking cessation (Ref. 586). who smoke cigarettes are switched to increased uptake among people who
FDA continues to be committed to LNC cigarettes and are provided with smoke and increased initiation due to
enabling the development of safe and alternative sources of nicotine, they will some dissuaded initiation of cigarette
effective drug product innovations that readily use the alternative sources of use, compared to those individuals
help smokers quit combustible nicotine. Moreover, the LNC cigarette taking up noncombusted products
cigarettes and improve their health. group that had access to NRT and instead.
FDA also recognizes, however, that noncombusted nicotine sources only Under the product standard scenario
other people may seek to switch from had statistically significantly reduced in the model, dual use of cigarettes and
cigarette smoking to using other biomarker levels of certain harmful noncombusted tobacco products also
noncombusted tobacco products that constituents (NNN and NNAL) would increase immediately, since a
deliver nicotine. People who smoke and compared to those who continued to greater proportion of people who
switch completely to a potentially less smoke NNC cigarettes (Ref. 5). The LNC continue to smoke cigarettes would take
harmful noncombusted tobacco product cigarette group with access to NRT and up noncombusted products than in the
to maintain their nicotine dependence both combusted and noncombusted baseline scenario, but this pattern
also could, to the extent that use of tobacco products resembled the NNC would not continue over time with dual
those products result in less harm, cigarette group (Ref. 5). use prevalence reaching levels below
significantly reduce their risk of Moreover, in general, the high levels 0.1 percent by the year 2035. Although
tobacco-related death and disease (Ref. of noncompliance with study-issued the increase in noncombusted tobacco
8). VLNC cigarettes in the context of product use trend changes over time
As described in section VI.B of this clinical trials, and continued use of non- (i.e., results showed a spike increase in
document, studies have reported on the study provided tobacco products noncombusted use prevalence within
ways in which people who use tobacco (particularly NNC cigarettes), suggest the first 3 years after implementation of
have predicted how their patterns of that VLNC cigarettes have lower appeal a nicotine product standard), the
tobacco use would change in response and abuse potential compared to NNC decrease in smoking prevalence
to the implementation of a nicotine cigarettes (Refs. 327 to 331). As a result, becomes greater than the increase in
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00058 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5089
noncombusted use following the higher noncombusted tobacco product implementation), we assumed a 20
implementation of a nicotine product risk, and the emergence of an illicit percent increase in the initiation of
standard. Consequently, overall tobacco market for full nicotine content noncombusted tobacco products among
use under the product standard scenario cigarettes. those who would otherwise have not
would remain lower than in the baseline In general, changes to baseline inputs used tobacco. Table 8 provides the
scenario. of noncombusted product use projected impacts on tobacco-related
As described in section VIII.A of this trajectories and health risks had mortality and morbidity through the
document, in addition to the minimal impact on smoking prevalence year 2100. Compared with the main
aforementioned main analyses, FDA and attributable morbidity and mortality results, a 20 percent increase in
conducted a series of sensitivity and the nicotine product standard initiation of noncombusted tobacco use
analyses to examine the impact of key policy scenario still resulted in had minimal impact in mortality
modeling assumptions on the main substantial public health benefits. In the outcomes given the substantial
outcome metrics of interest. In these main modeling analysis, we account for reduction in adverse health effects
analyses, we examined the sensitivity of people who would have initiated on projected under a potential nicotine
modeled results to underlying smoking cigarettes initiating on product standard. For example, by year
assumptions related to baseline product noncombusted tobacco products instead 2100, cumulative life years gained
use projections and mortality risk because of the product standard. It is decreased by less than 1 percent
estimates. Sensitivity analyses included also possible that there could be compared with the main results, while
examining the impact of increased increased initiation of noncombusted cumulative tobacco-attributable deaths
initiation of noncombusted tobacco tobacco use among those who would avoided remained almost the same. It is
product use among those who would otherwise not have used tobacco under important to note that, because we only
otherwise not have used tobacco, the the product standard scenario; for have data on the effect of cigarette
impact of an increase in switching from example, due to increased marketing of smoking (and not noncombusted
cigarettes to noncombusted tobacco noncombusted products because of the product use) on quality of life, the
product use, the impact of a varying policy or changes in public perceptions projected changes in QALYs gained
mortality risk associated with dual use of the harms of noncombusted products. from reduced smoking morbidity are not
of cigarettes and noncombusted tobacco In a sensitivity analysis, starting at 2027 affected by increasing noncombusted
products, the impact of lower and (year of the proposed standard product use initiation.
TABLE 8—IMPACT OF INCREASED INITIATION OF NONCOMBUSTED TOBACCO PRODUCTS AS A RESULT OF THE PROPOSED
NICOTINE PRODUCT STANDARD IMPLEMENTED IN 2027 ON PROJECTED SMOKING PREVALENCE AND TOBACCO-RE-
LATED MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY BY 2100
[Median (5th, 95th percentiles) estimates]
Projections through year 2100
Cumulative Cumulative
Noncombusted
Scenario tobacco- Cumulative life QALYs gained
tobacco use
attributable years gained from reduced
prevalence
mortality avoided (millions) smoking morbidity
(%)
(millions) (millions)
Main scenario .......................................................................... 14.1 (12.7, 14.9) 4.3 (1.6, 4.6) 76.4 (26.5, 82.5) 53.1 (27.5, 54.4)
20% increased initiation of noncombusted products ............... 15.4 (14.0, 16.1) 4.3 (1.6, 4.6) 75.9 (26.1, 82.1) 53.1 (27.5, 54.4)
Taken together, findings from prior significant health-related benefits on a because they produce secondhand
research, as well as FDA’s population population level. The population health smoke. It is well-established that
health model, suggest that if the model estimates that on average secondhand tobacco smoke causes
proposed product standard reduces the approximately 50 percent of people who premature death and disease in children
nicotine yield by setting a maximum smoke cigarettes will switch to and in adults who do not smoke (Ref.
level of nicotine in cigarettes only, but noncombusted tobacco products use per 15 at p.11). Secondhand smoke
people who smoke cigarettes still have year, and although we estimate that exposure is currently estimated to be
access to other NNC combusted tobacco such switching carries an 8 percent responsible for over 41,000 deaths
products, they likely would substitute higher risk than quitting tobacco use annually in the United States (Ref. 1).
with the NNC combusted tobacco entirely (based on findings from Henley For example, an estimated 7,300 lung
products and negate a significant et al. 2007 (Ref. 557)), this is still a cancer deaths and nearly 34,000
proportion of the public health impact significant health-related benefit coronary heart disease deaths annually
of the product standard. If other compared to continuing to use can be attributed to secondhand smoke
combusted tobacco products also are combusted tobacco products. (Ref. 1). Additionally, productivity
covered by this proposed product losses due to secondhand smoke-
4. Having Fewer People Smoke
standard, however, data suggest that attributable deaths are estimated to cost
Cigarettes and Other Combusted
people who smoke may switch from the United States $5.6 billion each year
Tobacco Products Will Reduce Death
combusted tobacco product use to (Ref. 1). and Disease Associated With
potentially less harmful tobacco Secondhand Smoke Exposure Children are one group
products. Moreover, findings indicate disproportionately exposed to and
that switching from combusted cigarette Cigarettes and other combusted impacted by secondhand smoke. The
use to noncombusted tobacco product tobacco products also have deadly 2014 Surgeon General’s Report
use has the potential to impart effects on people who do not smoke estimated that secondhand smoke is
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00059 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5090 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
associated with 150,000 to 300,000 percentage of people who do not smoke p<0.001) (Ref. 143). However, among
lower respiratory tract infections in and were age 3 and older exposed to men 20–59 years of age, exposure to
infants and children under age 18 secondhand smoke (defined in the study secondhand smoke did not significantly
months, 790,000 doctor’s office visits as levels 0.05–10 nanogram per differ by sexual orientation.
related to ear infections per year, and milliliter) declined across all racial and
FDA anticipates that the overall
202,000 asthma cases each year (Refs. 1 ethnic groups (Ref. 141). However, a
public health benefits of this proposed
and 137). In 2014, the U.S. Surgeon significantly higher proportion of non-
nicotine product standard would be far
General reported that 400 sudden infant Hispanic Black persons who do not
greater than those described above once
death syndrome (SIDS) deaths annually smoke continued to have detectable
we account for the impacts of reduced
are related to perinatal smoking or serum cotinine levels compared to
cigarette smoking on secondhand smoke
exposure to secondhand smoke; the Mexican American and non-Hispanic
exposure. As evidenced by evaluations
‘‘Reproductive Outcomes’’ section White persons who do not smoke. For
of smoke-free policies, decreasing
describes the impact of perinatal example, in 2011–2012, nearly 50
exposure to secondhand smoke will
smoking (Ref. 1). Children of parents percent of non-Hispanic Black people
decrease smoking-related death and
who smoke, when compared with who do not smoke had detectable serum
children of parents who do not smoke, cotinine levels, compared with 22 disease among people who do not
have an increased frequency of percent of non-Hispanic White and 24 smoke (Refs. 589 and 590).
respiratory infections like pneumonia percent of Mexican American people To estimate the potential impact of
and bronchitis (Ref. 563). Children who do not smoke (Ref. 141). the proposed standard on morbidity and
exposed to tobacco smoke in the home Additionally, disparities in secondhand mortality, FDA evaluated the existing
are also more likely to develop acute smoke exposure are found across scientific literature as well as findings
otitis media (middle ear infections) and various environmental settings, from our population health model,
persistent middle ear effusions (fluid including homes, vehicles, workplaces, which is described in section VIII.A of
behind the eardrum) (Ref. 563). More and public places. These disparities this document. Estimation of the
recent data from the 2013–2014 speak to the interrelated influences of mortality benefits of a nicotine product
NHANES estimates that approximately individual factors (e.g., age, race and
standard for secondhand smoke
58 million Americans who do not ethnicity, income) and existing
exposure used a similar approach. This
smoke (1 in 4) were exposed to inequities in places where members of
approach relied on scaling the estimate
secondhand smoke, including 14 communities impacted by tobacco-
of 437,400 deaths annually attributable
million children (Ref. 588). related health disparities are likely to
to direct cigarette smoking from 2005–
Approximately half of all U.S. children reside, spend time, and work (Ref. 174).
2009 (Ref. 1), to the number of deaths
ages 3–18 are exposed to cigarette The proposed product standard is
attributed to secondhand smoke
smoke regularly at home or other anticipated to reduce smoking-related
exposure. That ratio was then applied to
locations that still permit smoking (Ref. morbidity and mortality for specific
the model-derived projected changes in
1). In 2019, approximately one-quarter population groups that do not smoke
avoided cigarette-attributable deaths
of middle and high school students that are disproportionately exposed to
under the main product standard
reported breathing in secondhand secondhand smoke, especially youth.
scenario to project the number of
smoke in their homes or in a vehicle Moreover, there is also some scientific
(Ref. 145). evidence supporting disparities in avoided deaths over time from
The burden of secondhand smoke secondhand smoke exposure by sexual secondhand smoke exposure. In the
exposure is experienced orientation. An analysis of NHANES population health model, the impacts of
disproportionately among members of data from 2003–2010 found that a nicotine product standard on mortality
some racial and ethnic groups and lower secondhand smoke exposure (defined as from secondhand smoke exposure were
income groups. Among people who do a serum continine17levels ≥0.05 estimated by first calculating the ratio of
not smoke and were ages 3 and older, nanogram per milliliter) differed by secondhand smoke (41,280 deaths; (Ref.
findings from 2011 to 2018 NHANES sexual orientation among women 20–59 1)) to primary smoking-attributable
data indicate that non-Hispanic Black years of age (Ref. 143). This study found deaths. That value, 9.4 percent, was
persons and those living below the that among women 20–59 years of age, then applied to the projections of
poverty level had the highest levels of secondhand smoke exposure was higher cigarette-attributable deaths avoided
secondhand smoke exposure compared among non-smoking women who yielding an estimate of approximately
to people of other races and those living identified as lesbian (56.2 percent) or 169,000 cumulative deaths from
above the poverty level, respectively; who reported a lifetime experience with secondhand smoke exposure avoided by
these disparities persisted across all a same-gender partner (47.7 percent) 2060, rising to approximately 415,600
years of the study analysis from 2011 to than those women who identified as cumulative deaths avoided by the end of
2018 (Ref. 139). From 1999 to 2012, the exclusively heterosexual (33.0 percent; the century (see table 9).
TABLE 9—PROJECTED NUMBER OF TOBACCO-ATTRIBUTABLE DEATHS AVOIDED FOR SECONDHAND SMOKE AS A RESULT
OF A NICOTINE PRODUCT STANDARD IMPLEMENTED IN 2027
Cumulative secondhand
Year Scenario smoking-attributable
deaths avoided
2040 .............................................................................. Median (5th, 95th) ........................................................ 39,800 (4,900, 49,200)
2060 .............................................................................. Median (5th, 95th) ........................................................ 169,000 (38,500, 189,000)
2080 .............................................................................. Median (5th, 95th) ........................................................ 297,000 (91,200, 323,200)
2100 .............................................................................. Median (5th, 95th) ........................................................ 415,600 (159,700, 444,400)
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00060 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5091
5. Estimated Mortality Impact of nicotine product standard on the on fetal health and the health of
Reduced Smoking-Related Fires, number of deaths caused by smoking- newborn children, we expect avoided
Smoking-Related Perinatal Conditions, related fires, we applied the average of smoking-attributable perinatal deaths to
and Use of Non-Premium Cigars and 590 deaths annually from 2012–2016 accrue more rapidly than the estimates
Pipe Tobacco as a Result of from home structure fires started by presented here.
Implementation of the Proposed smoking materials (Ref. 591). We The smoke of other combusted
Standard calculated the ratio of smoking-related tobacco products, particularly those that
fire deaths to cigarette-attributable could be alternatives to cigarettes, such
FDA anticipates that the overall
deaths to be approximately 0.1 percent as cigars and pipes, contains many of
public health benefits of this proposed
and applied that value to the projections the same toxic constituents as cigarette
nicotine product standard would be
of avoided cigarette-attributable deaths, smoke, sometimes at even greater
greater than those described above once
yielding an estimate of approximately concentrations, and consequently
we account for the impacts of reduced
cumulative 2,400 deaths due to carries significant health risks (Refs. 53
cigarette smoking on smoking-related
smoking-related fires avoided by 2060, and 594). In fact, NNAL concentrations
fires and perinatal conditions, in
rising to approximately cumulative measured in people who smoke cigars
addition to the impacts of reduced use
5,900 deaths avoided by the end of the daily were found to be as high as those
of other combusted tobacco products.
century (table 10). measured in people who smoke
To estimate the potential impact of the
Cigarette smoking is responsible for cigarettes daily (Ref. 160). Cigar and/or
proposed standard on mortality, FDA
approximately 1,000 deaths from pipe smoking cause cancers of the lung
evaluated the existing scientific
perinatal conditions annually, including and upper aerodigestive tract, including
literature, as well as findings from the
over 600 deaths from prenatal the oral cavity, oropharynx,
population health model—which is
conditions and 400 deaths from SIDS hypopharynx, larynx and esophagus
described in section VIII.A. of this
(Ref. 1). Exposure to secondhand smoke (Ref. 158). Additional evidence suggests
document. Similar to the approach
can also cause adverse health effects in that cigar and/or pipe smoking is
taken to estimate the mortality benefits
infants and children. Currently, causally associated with cancers of the
of a nicotine product standard for
approximately half of all U.S. children pancreas, stomach, and bladder (Ref.
secondhand smoke exposure, estimation
and adolescents ages 3–18 years are 165). People who smoke cigars also have
of the mortality benefits of a nicotine
exposed to cigarette smoke regularly at increased risks for coronary heart
product standard for smoking-related
home or other locations that still permit disease and COPD compared with
fires, smoking-related perinatal
smoking (Ref. 1). Exposure to cigarette people who have never used tobacco
conditions, and use of non-premium
smoke among children and adolescents (Ref. 166). In a 2014 publication,
cigars and pipe tobacco used a
can trigger asthma attacks and lead to researchers estimated that regular cigar
consistent approach. This approach
more frequent respiratory infections smoking was the cause of approximately
relied on scaling the estimate of 437,400
compared to those not exposed to smoke 9,000 premature deaths in the year
deaths annually attributable to direct
(Ref. 1). Prenatal tobacco exposure and 2010, and more than 140,000 years of
cigarette smoking from 2005–2009 (Ref. postnatal secondhand smoke exposure potential life lost in the United States in
1), to the number of deaths attributed to increase the risks of fetal deaths, fetal 2010 (Ref. 134). The total number of
each of the following causes: smoking- growth restriction/low birth weight, cigar-attributable deaths may be even
related fires, smoking-related perinatal respiratory conditions, and SIDS (Ref. larger for several reasons. For example,
conditions, and use of non-premium 15, Ref. 1). In addition, thirdhand the analysis included only causes of
cigars and pipe tobacco. That ratio was smoke—the chemical residue from death found to be statistically
then applied to the model-derived combusted tobacco smoke that can significantly higher in two cohorts that
projected changes in avoided cigarette- become embedded in the environment studied people who smoke cigars,
attributable deaths under the main (e.g., carpet, dust)—results in exposure although there may be additional causes
product standard scenario to project the to harmful constituents, such as tobacco of death that are attributable to cigar
number of avoided deaths over time specific nitrosamines (Ref. 138). smoking. In addition, there may be
from each of these causes (i.e., smoking- Exposure to thirdhand smoke is increases in cigar smoking relative risks
related fires, smoking-related perinatal especially concerning for young over time, due to greater variety of cigar
conditions, and use of non-premium children, given their size and behaviors, products and differences in inhalation
cigars and pipe tobacco) (see table 10). like crawling on the ground and patterns (Ref. 134). Therefore, cessation
During 2012–2016, an estimated frequently putting their hands in their and reduced initiation of combusted
annual average of 18,100 reported home mouths. tobacco products other than cigarettes as
structure fires in the United States were FDA estimated the impacts of a a result of the proposed product
caused by smoking materials, which potential nicotine product standard on standard could yield even greater public
killed an average of 590 people annually perinatal mortality by first calculating health impacts than those presented.
(Ref. 591). Moreover, smoking materials the ratio of perinatal deaths (1,013 To estimate the impacts of a potential
remain a leading cause of fatal home deaths; (Ref. 1)) to primary smoking- nicotine product standard on avoided
fires in the United States, and people attributable deaths. That value, 0.2 deaths attributable to covered cigar
who smoke are not the only victims percent, was then applied to the products, we used estimates of
(Ref. 592). By one estimate, one out of projections of cigarette-attributable premature deaths attributable to regular
every four fatal victims of smoking- deaths avoided yielding an estimate of cigar smoking from a prior publication
material fires is not the person whose approximately 4,100 cumulative (Ref. 134). Given that the prior analysis
cigarette initiated the fire (Ref. 593). A perinatal deaths avoided by 2060, rising included all cigar types in its estimate
lower prevalence of cigarette smoking to approximately 10,200 cumulative of 9,246 premature deaths for the year
and reduced cigarette consumption is deaths avoided by the end of the 2010 and that we did not include
likely to decrease the occurrence of fires century (table 10). Since decreases in premium cigars in our current analysis,
caused by smoking materials, including cigarette smoking prevalence under the we estimated the fraction of deaths
cigarettes and other combusted tobacco proposed product standard would have attributed to cigar products other than
products. To estimate the impact of a immediate, rather than lagged, impacts premium cigars. We estimate that
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00061 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5092 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
among people who ever smoked cigars smoking-attributable deaths among estimates accounting for the mortality
fairly regularly and now smoke every youth who initiate cigar smoking will effects of a product standard prohibiting
day or some days in Wave 4 of the decrease on average by 37.5 percent36 characterizing flavors other than tobacco
PATH Study, 80 percent reported over 40 years (from 2078 to 2117).37 in cigars. These estimates reduced
smoking non-premium cigars and 20 That is, the cigar smoking-attributable baseline non-premium cigar-attributable
percent reported smoking premium deaths will decrease on average to 4,600 deaths in a phased-in manner reaching
cigars, using a classification (≈ 7,397 × (1¥0.375)) deaths per year a constant reduction of 780 deaths
methodology described previously (Ref. over the period from 2078 to 2117. averted per year after 30 years (Ref.
290) and subsequently updated (Ref. Assuming a linear decrease in cigar 597). These estimates and results are
595). On that basis, 7,397 (i.e., 9,246 × smoking-attributable mortality from presented in detail in sections VIII.E
0.8) deaths annually are attributed to 2065 to 2117, and an average of and VIII.F of this document.
using non-premium cigar products. By approximately 4,600 deaths per year To estimate the impacts of a nicotine
considering a relatively stable trend in over the period from 2078 to 2117, product standard on avoided deaths
adult cigar use35and assuming that implies non-premium cigar smoking- attributable to pipe tobacco smoking, we
adult cigar use is the main driver of attributable mortality will decline used the estimate of 1,095 premature
cigar-attributable deaths in the close linearly from 7,397 in 2065 to deaths per year provided by a prior
future, we assumed that non-premium approximately 4,390 deaths in 2100. We analysis (Ref. 598). We calculated the
cigar-attributable mortality would assume a linear decrease for simplicity ratio of pipe tobacco to cigarette-
remain constant at 7,397 cigar- and because trends for cigar use attributable deaths to be 0.3 percent and
attributable deaths per year through considered in this post-processing applied that value to the projections of
2065 (or roughly the time at which strategy come from a short interval avoided cigarette-attributable deaths,
people who use cigars aged 26 and older (PATH Study data, Waves 1 to 5, and yielding an estimate of approximately
in 2021 would all have reached age 70 Waves 3 to 5). We then calculate the 4,500 cumulative deaths due to pipe
and older). However, as youth and ratio of non-premium cigar to cigarette- tobacco smoking avoided by 2060, rising
young adult cigar smoking has declined attributable deaths for each year in the to approximately 11,000 cumulative
in recent years, we adopt a different projection period and apply those deaths avoided by the end of the
trend in baseline cigar-attributable values to the projections of avoided century (see table 10).
mortality in the further future (after cigarette-attributable deaths to estimate Based on these collective findings and
2065). To obtain baseline non-premium non-premium cigar-attributable deaths estimates, FDA anticipates that the
cigar-attributable mortality from 2066 under the nicotine policy scenario. proposed product standard will further
through the end of the modeling period Using this approach, by 2060, we improve public health due to the
(2100), we assume non-premium cigar- estimate approximately 54,800 impacts of reduced cigarette smoking on
attributable mortality will eventually cumulative deaths due to non-premium smoking-related fires and perinatal
follow the observed relative decline in cigar products would be avoided, rising conditions, in addition to the impacts of
cigar use among young adults as they to approximately 214,700 cumulative reduced use of other, non-cigarette
reach older ages. Specifically, we deaths avoided by 2100 (see table 10). combusted tobacco products covered by
assume that non-premium cigar Similar methods were used to calculate this proposed rule.
TABLE 10—PROJECTED NUMBER OF TOBACCO-ATTRIBUTABLE DEATHS AVOIDED FOR SMOKING RELATED FIRES, SMOKING
RELATED PERINATAL CONDITIONS, NON-PREMIUM CIGAR AND PIPE TOBACCO USE AS A RESULT OF A NICOTINE
PRODUCT STANDARD IMPLEMENTED IN 2027
Cumulative Cumulative non-premium Cumulative pipe
Cumulative perinatal
Year Scenario smoking-related cigar-attributable tobacco-attributable
deaths avoided
fire deaths avoided deaths avoided deaths avoided
2040 ......... Median (5th, 95th) ..... 600 (100, 700) 1,000 (100, 1,200) 8,900 (1,000, 11,000) 1,100 (130, 1,300)
2060 ......... Median (5th, 95th) ..... 2,400 (600, 2,700) 4,100 (900, 4,600) 54,800 (13,200, 60,500) 4,500 (1,000, 5,000)
2080 ......... Median (5th, 95th) ..... 4,200 (1,300, 4,600) 7,300 (2,200, 7,900) 134,700 (46,000, 144,100) 7,900 (2,400, 8,600)
2100 ......... Median (5th, 95th) ..... 5,900 (2,300, 6,400) 10,200 (3,900, 10,900) 214,700 (91,600, 225,800) 11,000 (4,200, 11,800)
6. Public Health Benefits of the suggest a significant public health proposed product standard are likely to
Proposed Standard Not Addressed in benefit to the United States resulting be even greater than those quantified,
FDA’s Population Health Model from substantial reductions in smoking since our analysis does not account for
While FDA’s population health prevalence, these analyses do not the full range of impacts that smoking
model’s estimates of the potential address other additional benefits. The has on public health in the United
impact from a nicotine product standard overall public health benefits of this States.
35Adult cigar smoking has historically remained from 15.7 percent during Wave 1 (2013–2014) to 11 specific to tobacco use and average them to produce
stable. Data from the NHIS over 2000–2015 has percent during Wave 5 (2018–2019), representing a an estimate of 37.5 percent (i.e., (30 + 45)/2).
shown that prevalence of current cigar smoking has 30 percent relative decline in prevalence. 37For youth, we assume that initiation occurs by
remained generally stable at around 2.3 percent Additionally, data from the PATH Study Waves 3
the age of 18, followed by a cigar smoking-
among U.S. adults aged 18 years and older (Ref. (2015–2016) and 5 (2018–2019) indicate that cigar
attributable death 52 years later. We then assume 596). Adult (ages 26 or older) cigar use also use among 18-year-olds declined from 7.2 percent
remained relatively stable in NSDUH data for 2011 to 3.9 percent, implying a steeper decline of cigar use initiation occurs during years 2025 to
and 2019 and did not significantly change (4.2 approximately 45 percent in more recent years 2064 (40-year period), and cigar smoking-
percent in 2011 to 4.0 percent in 2019 for cigars) within this smaller age cohort. We use these two attributable deaths begin to occur a year after the
(Ref. 286). data points to estimate the decrease in cigar period from 2077 (i.e., 2025 + 52) through 2116 (i.e.,
36According to data from the PATH Study, young smoking among young people because both provide 2064 + 52); that is, over the period from 2078 to
adult (ages 18–24) past 30-day cigar use declined relevant information from a national survey that is 2117.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00062 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5093
First, although we estimated the still permit smoking. Also, a recent 7. Potential Risks to the Population as
impact of self-reported quality of life, study using NYTS data reported that, in a Whole of the Proposed Nicotine
this may not capture the full breadth 2019, 25.3 percent and 23.3 percent of Product Standard Versus the Potential
and depth of smoking-attributable students were exposed to home and Benefits of the Proposed Product
morbidity. Tobacco smoke exposure can vehicle secondhand smoke, respectively Standard
cause immediate and long-term adverse (Ref. 145). Exposure to cigarette smoke There are possible countervailing
health effects (Ref. 1). Cigarette smoking among children and adolescents can effects that could occur from the
‘‘has been causally linked to diseases of trigger asthma attacks and lead to more proposed product standard, if finalized,
nearly all organs of the body, to frequent respiratory infections and potential factors that could limit its
diminished health status, and to harm to compared to those not exposed to smoke population health effect. Potential risks
the fetus’’ (Ref. 1). Each year, an (Ref. 1). to the population, however, would
estimated 480,000 people in the United generally only occur among individuals
States die from smoking; the U.S. Third, a lower prevalence of cigarette currently smoking cigarettes and other
Surgeon General has reported that for smoking and reduced cigarette combusted tobacco products covered by
every person that dies from smoking, consumption will decrease the the scope of this proposed rule, as FDA
about 30 individuals will suffer from at occurrence of fire-related injuries and concludes there are little to no risks to
least one smoking-related disease (Ref. damages caused by smoking materials, those who do not use tobacco. These
1). One study estimated that individuals including cigarettes and other potential risks do not offset the
in the United States have had 14.0 combusted tobacco products. From 2012 anticipated benefits of the rule. The
million major smoking-attributable to 2016, an estimated average of 18,100 countervailing or limiting effects on
conditions, including more than 7.4 home structure fires in the United States people who currently use tobacco
million cases of COPD, nearly 2.3 annually were caused by smoking products could include compensatory
million heart attacks, 1.8 million cases materials (Ref. 591). Reductions in smoking. As part of this rulemaking,
of diabetes, nearly 1.2 million stroke smoking as a result of the proposed FDA is required by the Tobacco Control
events, more than 300,000 cases of lung nicotine product standard are likely to Act to consider information submitted
cancer, and nearly 1 million cases of lead to not only fewer fatalities (as on such possible countervailing effects,
other smoking-attributable cancers (i.e., described previously) but also including among populations that are
bladder, cervix, colon/rectum, kidney, reductions in the annual average of disproportionately impacted by tobacco-
larynx, mouth, tongue, lip, throat, 1,130 injuries (Ref. 591). related morbidity and mortality, such as
pharynx, stomach) (Ref. 564). Cigarette adolescents who use tobacco and other
Fourth, these projections did not
smoking, in addition to causing disease, populations.
can diminish overall health status include the potential health benefits With a lower level of nicotine in
leading to higher risks for surgical associated with people who smoke cigarettes, some people who use
complications, including wound healing cutting down on the number of cigarettes and certain other combusted
and respiratory complications, cigarettes smoked as a result of the tobacco products could alter their
increased absenteeism from work, and proposed nicotine product standard. smoking behavior in the form of
greater use of healthcare services (Ref. Quitting cigarette smoking entirely compensatory smoking (i.e., a change in
1). In terms of a monetary measure of clearly leads to the greatest reductions normal smoking behavior that would
the impact of cigarette smoking on the in disease risk, and duration of smoking increase exposure to cigarette smoke to
public health, in 2018, cigarette has been shown to be a greater driver of compensate for reduced nicotine intake)
smoking cost the United States more disease risk than frequency of use (Ref. when switching from usual brand or
than $600 billion, including more than 28). Although some studies have not NNC cigarettes to VLNC cigarettes. This
$240 billion in healthcare spending found evidence of lower disease risk concern is echoed in qualitative
(Ref. 10), nearly $185 billion in lost after cutting down on cigarettes (Refs. research of people who currently use
productivity from smoking-related 28, 266, 599 to 601), others have shown tobacco who report fears that a potential
illnesses and health conditions (Ref. 10), that substantial reductions in cigarette reduction in nicotine will cause them to
nearly $180 billion in lost productivity consumption can lead to some engage in compensatory smoking (Refs.
from smoking-related premature death reductions in disease risk, especially for 264, 606 to 608). Compensatory
(Refs. 1 and 10), and $7 billion in lost lung cancer, for those who would have smoking—or compensation—occurs
productivity from premature death from otherwise continued to smoke (Ref. when people who smoke seek to obtain
secondhand smoke exposure (Refs. 1 602). Such studies have found the amount of nicotine needed to
and 11). Increased smoking cessation, sustain their addiction by smoking more
decreased risk of lung cancer deaths
reduced cigarette consumption, and CPD, taking more and deeper puffs, or
(Ref. 603) and decreased risk of lung
lower progression to regular use will puffing with a faster draw rate. In both
cancer among people who smoke who
reduce both mortality from smoking and brief and extended exposure studies
reduce cigarette consumption (Refs. 604
the enormous burden of cigarette- with VLNC cigarettes, compensation
and 605). As described above, studies of
attributable diseases in the United was measured using CPD, puff
States. VLNC cigarettes have shown that their topography measures, and biomarkers of
use results in reductions in cigarettes
Second, the estimated impacts to CO exposure, such as breath CO or
smoked per day and exposure to toxic
public health do not include the COHb. Some transient compensatory
constituents among individuals who
reductions in morbidity associated with smoking may occur following initial
continue to smoke, which may reduce
reduced exposure to secondhand smoke VLNC cigarette exposure. However, after
among infants and children. A report of smoking-related disease risks. continued use of VLNC cigarettes,
the U.S. Surgeon General (Ref. 1) found Consequently, additional public health people who smoke stop attempting to
that approximately half of all children benefits may be observed among those compensate for the reduced nicotine
and adolescents ages 3–18 in the United who continue to smoke cigarettes (but content, because they are unable to
States are exposed to cigarette smoke substantially fewer CPD) after a nicotine obtain adequate amounts of nicotine
regularly at home or other locations that product standard is in place. through these behaviors. The following
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00063 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5094 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
paragraphs discuss data demonstrating that would likely dissipate over time. the LNC cigarette, and a non-significant
this outcome. See also section VII.B of These data also support FDA’s proposed trend emerged such that increases in
this document discussing compensatory immediate nicotine reduction approach breath CO were higher after smoking the
smoking with an immediate nicotine (see section VII.C of this document). VLNC cigarette compared to the LNC
reduction approach versus a gradual Studies consistently report that cigarette (Refs. 395 and 416). However,
reduction approach. consumers have misperceptions about the LNC cigarette was rated as
When exposure to VLNC cigarettes is the harms of nicotine and VLNC statistically significantly more pleasant
brief (e.g., the first few uses of VLNC cigarettes (see sections IV.F and V.B of than the VLNC cigarette (Ref. 395).
cigarettes), transient compensatory this document). A majority of U.S. Similar to studies in adults who
smoking may occur. In brief exposure consumers incorrectly believe that smoke cigarettes, studies in youth and
studies, changes in smoking topography nicotine is the primary cause of cancer young adults who smoke cigarettes have
(Refs. 393 to 395) and increases in CO and health harms from cigarettes (Refs. shown that positive subjective effects
(Refs. 393, 411, and 420) have been 227 to 229, 232, 233, 235 to 245, 264, ratings (e.g., ‘‘satisfaction,’’ ‘‘pleasure,’’
observed. For example, one study and 612 to 618), and a proportion of ‘‘taste,’’ ‘‘strength,’’ and ‘‘stimulation’’)
demonstrated the transient nature of consumers with this misperception also are lower for VLNC cigarettes compared
compensatory smoking by showing believe that RNC cigarettes are less to LNC and NNC cigarettes. A laboratory
increases in smoking topography and harmful than NNC cigarettes (Refs. 260 study of people ages 15–19 who smoke
CO exposure during the first and second to 262). Additionally, while a majority found no effect of nicotine content on
exposures to VLNC cigarettes, followed of consumers understand that nicotine withdrawal, negative affect, or CO boost;
by the subsequent dissipation of these is addictive (Refs. 227 to 229, 232, 233, however, NNC cigarettes were
effects by the third and fourth exposures and 619), they do not necessarily associated with greater reductions in
((Ref. 394). Similarly, another study believe that RNC cigarettes would be craving and increased smoking
found that during a 5-day study where less addictive than NNC cigarettes (Refs. satisfaction relative to VLNC cigarettes
participants checked into a hotel and 260 and 261). There is also evidence (Ref. 442). A similar laboratory study in
were restricted to only study-issued from qualitative studies showing that young adults (age 18–25) found no
cigarettes, mouth-level nicotine some consumers do not understand the influence of nicotine content on total
exposure indicated that participants technical feasibility of reducing nicotine nicotine withdrawal score, affect, or
initially puffed VLNC cigarettes with in cigarettes to minimally addictive or smoking topography; however, NNC
greater intensity than NNC cigarettes, nonaddictive levels, which may impact cigarettes were associated with
although this effect diminished across consumers’ ability to comprehend and increased subjective effects ratings
sessions (Ref. 609). However, results accept messages communicating the compared to LNC and VLNC cigarettes
from the majority of studies show no policy (Refs. 270 and 229). FDA (Ref. 620). Notably, a secondary analysis
compensatory smoking as a result of recognizes the importance of addressing of data from a clinical trial (Ref. 29)
switching from usual brand or NNC consumer misperceptions of the harm found that, at the end of the 6-week
cigarettes to VLNC cigarettes. Although and addictiveness of nicotine and VLNC trial, there was no influence of age on
not all studies examined every measure cigarettes to minimize the unintended subjective effects, TNE levels, or puff
of compensatory smoking, most studies effects of a proposed product standard volume in participants who smoked
found no differences between control that limits the level of nicotine in LNC or VLNC cigarettes (Ref. 621).
and VLNC cigarette conditions cigarettes and certain other combusted Several studies have examined the
regarding CPD (Refs. 5, 32, 34, 40, 41, tobacco products to make those effects of nicotine content in cigarettes
265, 331, 374, 387, 386, 390, 396, and products minimally addictive or on adolescents and young adults who
415), CO exposure (Refs. 5, 32, 34, 40, nonaddictive. FDA will continue to smoke. One laboratory study that
41, 265, 374, 381, 390, 391, 396, 402, conduct research on consumer assessed the effects of nicotine content
409, 410, 412 to 414, 467, and 610), perceptions of tobacco product harms, and menthol preference among
smoking topography (Refs. 381, 391, use communication tools (e.g., adolescents (ages 15–19) who smoke
403, 411, 415, and 611), or all three consumer outreach, public education found that VLNC cigarettes were rated
measures (Refs. 329, 382 to 384). initiatives, engagement with interested statistically significantly lower than
Notably, compensatory smoking has parties), and consider further regulatory NNC cigarettes, and menthol preference
been observed with some reduced options within our authorities (e.g., did not affect subjective effects ratings
nicotine content cigarettes containing potential future labeling and advertising of VLNC cigarettes (Ref. 408). One study
intermediate levels of nicotine (e.g., regulations) to ensure that all consumers also found that young adults (ages 18–
LNC cigarettes). For example, in a study are informed of the risks of using 24) who smoke exhibited lower demand
of 165 people who use cigarettes tobacco products that contain nicotine, for LNC and VLNC cigarettes than
assigned to switch to LNC cigarettes or including VLNC cigarettes. adults, but there were no other
VLNC cigarettes, researchers found Prior work also has explored whether differences between the two age groups
small but statistically significant the proposed product standard may in smoking topography, breath CO,
differences in CPD between the LNC have a differential impact on specific cigarette puffs, craving, withdrawal, or
and VLNC cigarette conditions, such populations. Studies that have smoking urge measures (Ref. 622).
that LNC CPD increased over the course investigated the effects of VLNC Another study investigating how
of the 6-week intervention, while VLNC cigarettes in adolescents who smoke nicotine exposure contributes to relief of
CPD decreased (Ref. 32). However, one cigarettes have done so under craving and negative affect among
of the largest studies involving reduced conditions of brief exposure (e.g., single young adults (ages 18–25) who smoke
nicotine content cigarettes found no exposure to a VLNC cigarette in a found that smoking reduced craving and
compensatory smoking behavior for laboratory setting). A study comparing negative affect regardless of nicotine
cigarettes containing intermediate levels VLNC and LNC cigarette smoking content, and smoking topography did
of nicotine (Ref. 29). Therefore, FDA topography in adolescents who smoke not vary as a function of nicotine
concludes the nicotine level proposed cigarettes found that participants took content (Ref. 611). Finally, a study of
for this standard would result in statistically significantly more puffs youth and young adults who smoke
limited, if any, compensatory smoking from the VLNC cigarette compared to found that two-thirds of participants
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00064 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5095
believed that study cigarettes had lower cigarettes were associated with greater studies found no statistically significant
health risks than usual brand cigarettes, reductions in craving and withdrawal differences in craving or withdrawal as
that they were largely concerned with symptoms compared to VLNC cigarettes. a function of nicotine content following
compensatory smoking following a In this group, VLNC cigarettes were not brief smoking abstinence in those with
nicotine reduction policy, and that half associated with increased markers of symptoms of mental health disorders
stated an intention to quit smoking after compensatory smoking (e.g., smoking (Refs. 391, 434, and 467), others showed
the policy is put in place while the topography, CO) compared to the that use of usual brand cigarettes was
other half would continue to smoke or general population. Researchers also associated with larger decreases in
switch to another tobacco product (Ref. assessed psychiatric symptomatology as craving and withdrawal compared to
606). a function of VLNC cigarette use and VLNC cigarettes (Ref. 468). An extended
One study assessed longer duration found that VLNC cigarettes were exposure study found that, relative to
effects (i.e., 3 weeks) of VLNC cigarettes associated with improvements in mood NNC cigarettes, use of LNC and VLNC
in adolescent daily smokers (ages 15– symptoms, likely due to the anxiety- cigarettes reduced smoking rates,
19) not currently intending to quit. increasing properties of nicotine. nicotine dependence, and cigarette
Participants assigned to smoke VLNC Several studies investigated the craving, and these effects were not
cigarettes smoked significantly fewer effects of LNC and VLNC cigarettes on moderated by baseline depressive
total CPD than those in the NNC mood following mood induction (i.e., an symptoms (Ref. 629). In addition,
cigarette group. VLNC cigarettes were experimental method for inducing a similar to the general population,
associated with lower levels of craving specific mood state) in people who use people who smoke with poor mental
reduction than NNC cigarettes; however, cigarettes with symptoms of mental health rate NNC cigarettes as more
there were no differences nicotine health disorders (Refs. 434, 450, and rewarding (e.g., taste, satisfaction) and
dependence or TNE levels among VLNC 628). These studies found that, reinforcing compared to VLNC
and NNC cigarette groups at the end of following positive mood induction, LNC cigarettes (Refs. 391, 450, 467, and 628).
the study (Ref. 623). A secondary cigarettes compared to VLNC cigarettes Additionally, a 33-week study that
analysis of this study showed that were associated with an enhancement of
randomized participants to either NNC
participants assigned to smoke VLNC positive mood among people who
cigarettes or a gradual nicotine
cigarettes had significantly lower smoke and are prone to depression, but
reduction to VLNC levels found that the
demand for study cigarettes than those not control participants (Refs. 450 and
gradual reduction group exhibited
assigned to smoke NNC cigarettes, 628). In addition, LNC cigarettes, but
significantly lower cotinine levels, CPD,
suggesting that a nicotine reduction not VLNC cigarettes, were associated
and exhaled CO compared to the NNC
policy may reduce the reinforcing value with a worsening of negative mood in
cigarette group. Mental health effects
of combusted cigarettes in adolescents response to negative mood induction
and adverse events did not significantly
(Ref. 624). among people who smoke, regardless of
differ between the two groups, and
In summary, while existing data baseline mental health status (Ref. 628).
significantly more participants in the
suggest that adolescents prefer LNC Similarly, following an anxiety-eliciting
gradual nicotine reduction group were
cigarettes over VLNC cigarettes, and that mood induction, participants with post-
abstinent at the end of the treatment
they may display compensatory traumatic stress disorder self-reported
compared to the NNC cigarette group
smoking behaviors in response to VLNC greater relief of anxiety after smoking
(Ref. 631).
cigarettes, these data are limited. As LNC cigarettes compared to VLNC
discussed in section VII.B of this cigarettes; however, LNC cigarettes A study that compared the effects of
document, compensation typically increased physical autonomic VLNC, LNC, and NNC cigarettes on
dissipates after repeated exposure. symptoms of anxiety (e.g., skin becomes smoking behavior in people with opioid
Thus, in the absence of extended a better conductor of electricity, heart use disorder who smoke cigarettes,
exposure studies, it is difficult to draw rate) relative to VLNC cigarettes (Ref. women of childbearing age with a high
conclusions regarding the effects of 434). school education or less who smoke
VLNC cigarette use on compensatory A secondary analysis of an extended cigarettes, or individuals with affective
smoking in adolescents and young exposure study assessed the effects of disorders who smoke cigarettes found
adults. cigarettes varying in nicotine content on no statistically significant differences in
Individuals with symptoms of mental changes in psychiatric symptomatology smoking topography or breath CO as a
health disorders smoke cigarettes in among those with and without elevated function of nicotine content (Ref. 391).
disproportionately large numbers. depression symptoms (Ref. 629). Among Subsequent analyses of this study also
People with symptoms of mental health participants with elevated depression found that cannabis use status, presence
disorders who smoke cigarettes have symptoms, those assigned to smoke LNC of chronic health conditions, and sex
increased nicotine withdrawal or VLNC cigarettes for 6 weeks had did not correlate with differences in
symptoms (Refs. 625 and 626) and are lower depressive symptoms at the end smoking topography or the reinforcing
more likely to smoke to ameliorate of the study compared to those assigned effects of nicotine among people who
negative mood (Ref. 627). As a result, to smoke NNC cigarettes. Another study smoke (Refs. 459 and 632). A larger 12-
this population has increased risk of that assigned participants with serious week RCT among these same three
tobacco-related mortality (Ref. 130). mental illness to receive either NNC or populations found statistically
Researchers have investigated the VLNC cigarettes saw no change in significantly lower CPD and nicotine
effects of VLNC cigarettes in people who participants’ psychiatric symptoms at dependence levels across study weeks
use cigarettes with symptoms of mental the end of 6 weeks (Ref. 440). among those assigned to received VLNC
health disorders to determine whether Several studies assessed the effects of or LNC cigarettes compared to those
VLNC cigarettes are associated with VLNC cigarettes on smoking rates, assigned to receive NNC cigarettes (Ref.
differential effects on craving, nicotine craving, dependence, 633). A secondary analysis of this study
withdrawal, smoking topography, or use withdrawal, and subjective effects found no statistically significant effects
behavior among this group compared to among those with symptoms of mental of nicotine dose or population on tests
the general population. In this group, as health disorders (Refs. 391, 409, 434, of cognitive performance, suggesting
in the general population, NNC 467, 468, 629, and 630). While some that cognitive performance was not
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00065 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5096 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
significantly impaired with prolonged use does not increase compensatory nicotine product standard. FDA requests
exposure to VLNC cigarettes among alcohol, marijuana, or other illicit drug additional information concerning the
vulnerable populations (Ref. 634). A use (Refs. 386, 632, and 638). However, potential risks discussed in this section,
study among participants with one secondary analysis found that as well as any other negative effects that
schizophrenia found that both people although 20-weeks of VLNC cigarette could result from this rule, and how
with schizophrenia who smoke and use reduced CPD compared to NNC they could be minimized.
control participants smoked fewer puffs cigarette use, co-users of marijuana and
E. Approach Concerning Adjustments to
and had lower total puff volumes, cigarettes showed increased marijuana
Inputs to the Model Accounting for
shorter inter-puff intervals, longer puff use when assigned to VLNC cigarettes
Other Tobacco Product Standards
durations, and marginally higher (Ref. 639).
individual puff volumes when smoking In summary, research has shown that In 2022, FDA issued proposed tobacco
VLNC cigarettes compared to usual VLNC cigarettes reduce the number of product standards to prohibit menthol
brand cigarettes (Ref. 467). However, a cigarettes smoked per day among as a characterizing flavor in cigarettes
subsequent analysis using data from this populations that use tobacco at and to prohibit all characterizing flavors
same study showed that these disproportionately high levels, (other than tobacco) in cigars (87 FR
differences were not associated with including those of low socioeconomic 26454, May 4, 2022). If finalized, these
increases in breath CO boost (Ref. 392). status, and those with mental or rules are anticipated to reduce overall
A 33-week randomized clinical study behavioral health conditions. youth initiation and increase cessation
evaluated the effects of gradually Importantly, there has been little to no among individuals who smoke
reducing the nicotine content in evidence that VLNC cigarettes increase cigarettes and cigars. In this adjusted
cigarettes to VLNC cigarette levels on risk of adverse effects (e.g., model, we utilized estimates of the
ratings of dependence, biomarkers, and exacerbations of psychiatric likely population health impact of these
cessation in 245 adults of low symptomatology, drug use) in these rules, quantified in peer-reviewed
socioeconomic status. CPD, plasma populations. The proposed nicotine publications and discussed in the rules,
cotinine, CO, and NNAL levels were product standard is not anticipated to be to adjust the baseline inputs for
significantly lower for the gradual detrimental to these populations; rather, initiation of combusted and
reduction group compared to the NNC it is anticipated to benefit these groups, noncombusted products, as well as
cigarette group; however, there were no as well as the general population as a cessation of combusted products and
significant differences in dependence or whole. likelihood of switching to incorporate
withdrawal as a function of group. FDA recognizes that actors the impact of the final rules in this
Those who received VLNC cigarettes participating in illicit markets are proposed nicotine product standard.
were statistically significantly more unlikely to conform their products and We quantified the potential impact of
likely to make a quit attempt during the sales to Federal, State, and local laws. a menthol cigarette product standard on
study compared to those in the NNC As discussed elsewhere in this the U.S. population (87 FR 26454),
cigarette group; however, there was no document, the available evidence assuming that the implementation of a
statistically significant difference in quit suggests that the health impacts of rule prohibiting menthol affects baseline
rates as a function of group among those counterfeit products should be minimal. model input parameters associated with
who chose to make a quit attempt (Ref. As the National Research Council (NRC) smoking initiation, smoking cessation,
635). A secondary analysis of this study and the Institute of Medicine (IOM) noncombusted initiation, and switching
showed that outcomes did not differ as (NRC/IOM) Report notes, ‘‘Research on from cigarettes to noncombusted
a function of menthol status, except that counterfeit cigarettes to date has shown products. To avoid confusion with the
those participants who smoked menthol some differences in levels of tar and main analysis baseline scenario, we
cigarettes had less of a cotinine selected toxicants in comparison with called this new scenario a ‘‘menthol
reduction (Ref. 636). conventional cigarettes . . . but these product standard baseline scenario.’’
Several studies used laboratory elevated levels have not been shown to First, we assumed that a menthol
paradigms to assess the effects of affect overall toxicity and, based on product standard is implemented in
alcohol on specific components of current evidence, are unlikely to 2025, 2 years before the implementation
smoking behavior for nicotine versus significantly increase the health risk of of a potential nicotine product standard
non-nicotine factors in people who an already dangerous product’’ (Ref. in 2027. Changes in tobacco use
consume alcohol heavily. One study 560). Even in studies (Ref. 640) that behaviors due to the implementation of
found that alcohol increased smoking suggest that counterfeit cigarettes can a menthol product standard (primarily
urge and subjective ratings of smoking contain higher levels of harmful for people who would initiate future
for both NNC and VLNC cigarettes (Ref. substances, the studies cannot make menthol cigarette use and people who
637), while another study found that conclusions about the individual or currently use menthol cigarettes) were
NNC cigarettes were associated with population-wide health risks from such derived from an expert elicitation that
increases in subjective effects and a substances, in part because of the was developed to assess the impact of
greater reduction in cigarette craving variations between them, inconsistent a menthol product standard on smoking
than VLNC cigarettes, and these effects distribution of the products among the initiation and cessation, and on
were enhanced by ethanol self- population, and inconsistent use among noncombusted use (Ref. 562).
administration (Ref. 448). In addition, in consumers. FDA will continue to Specifically, 11 experts were asked to
a sample of people who smoked who monitor the best available science to estimate anticipated behaviors under a
also regularly consumed alcohol, NNC determine if this changes in the future. menthol product standard, including
cigarettes reduced craving and increased Based on the available evidence, FDA transitioning to illicit menthol
cognitive performance compared to finds that, while there may be potential combusted products, switching to non-
VLNC cigarettes (Ref. 448). Furthermore, risks that could diminish the expected menthol combusted products, switching
several secondary analyses of clinical population health benefits of the to ENDS products or HTPs, or quitting
studies found no evidence that alcohol proposed standard, such effects would use of all tobacco products. We used the
or marijuana use moderates the effects be significantly outweighed by the results of the expert elicitation
of VLNC cigarettes, and VLNC cigarette potential benefits of the proposed (finalized in September 2020) to
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00066 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5097
compute factors that can be used to tobacco use behaviors resulting from a (from 2026 to 2055), with a constant
scale smoking initiation and cessation menthol product standard (such as benefit of 780 deaths avoided until year
rates, as well as switching and changes in smoking initiation or 2064. We also assumed avoided cigar-
noncombusted initiation, accounting for cessation) to adjust for the effect of a attributable deaths will increase from
a potential reduction/increase in rates. menthol rule over time. One important 780 in 2064 to 1,120 in 2100.
People who currently smoke non- assumption of the FDA model is that the
Details regarding the calculation of
menthol cigarettes were assumed to be nicotine product standard would be
avoided cigar-attributable deaths
unaffected by a menthol product implemented in 2027, whereas a
because of the flavored cigar rule can be
standard. We used the average impact menthol rule would be implemented in
found in Appendix L of FDA’s modeling
scenario from Levy et al. 2023 (Ref. 562) 2025. This is important to keep in mind
document (Ref. 42). The estimated
to be consistent with the approach taken as public health benefits attributable to
deaths averted by a flavored cigar
in the proposed menthol product a menthol rule (such as mortality and
product standard were subtracted from
standard rule. Details regarding the morbidity health impacts) will be
baseline non-premium cigar deaths in
calculation of scaling factors, accruing for 2 years before
the United States each year to produce
considering the expert elicitation data, implementation of the nicotine product
yearly estimates for non-premium cigar
can be found in Appendix K of FDA’s standard (and, therefore, not captured in
deaths with a flavored cigar standard.
modeling document (Ref. 42). this model).
We used these estimates to calculate a
In the menthol product standard A more comprehensive analysis of the
ratio of non-premium cigar to cigarette-
baseline scenario, baseline smoking public heath impact of the menthol
attributable deaths for each year in the
initiation and noncombusted initiation cigarette product standard can therefore
projection period and applied those
rates were adjusted starting in 2025 (i.e., be found in the proposed menthol
values to the projections of avoided
year of a potential menthol prohibition product standard. There are also other
cigarette-attributable deaths to estimate
implementation) until the end of the important differences between the
non-premium cigar-attributable deaths
simulation period. Also, baseline menthol-adjusted FDA model and the
under the nicotine product standard
smoking cessation and complete Levy et al. modeling approach that can
scenario.
switching (from cigarettes to impact comparability, such as input
noncombusted products) were adjusted model parameters, modeling F. Benefits and Risks to the Population
only at the first year of such a potential frameworks, assumptions, and source as a Whole Accounting for Other
menthol product standard data. For these reasons, it is not Tobacco Product Standards
implementation. After the first year, appropriate to expect that the difference
when a sudden increase in smoking between public health impact estimates Table 11 presents the impact results
cessation and complete switching was of the nicotine product standard with of the nicotine product standard using
incorporated, the remaining people who and without the menthol adjustment baseline assumptions adjusted for the
smoke initiated use of non-menthol or would directly approximate the effect of a menthol cigarette product
illicit menthol cigarettes, subject to the potential public health benefits of the standard for years 2040, 2060, 2080, and
cessation and complete switching rates menthol product standard as presented 2100. In general, changes to baseline
for people who smoke non-menthol in the proposed menthol product inputs of initiation and cessation of
cigarettes (Ref. 641). We conducted the standard. combusted products as well as
analysis considering a mean decrease in In 2022, FDA also issued a proposed switching to noncombusted products as
cigarette smoking initiation (based on product standard to prohibit a result of implementation of a menthol
estimates from an expert elicitation), a characterizing flavors (other than cigarette product standard slightly
mean increase in noncombusted tobacco) in cigars (87 FR 26396, May 4, reduced projected smoking prevalence
product initiation, and a mean increase 2022). It is estimated that such a and avoided mortality and morbidity,
in smoking cessation and switching, as standard would prevent 780 deaths due compared to the main analysis results.
presented in Levy et al. 2023 (Ref. 562). to cigar smoking in the United States Specifically, we estimate that by 2060,
It is important to note that the menthol- each year (Ref. 134). A post-processing the proposed nicotine product standard
adjusted population health model does analysis of cumulative non-premium would avert approximately 1.6 million
not directly estimate the public health cigar-attributable deaths avoided was deaths due to tobacco, rising to
impacts of a prohibition on menthol as conducted to account for the effects of approximately 3.4 million by 2100.
characterizing flavor in cigarettes. In such a product standard, considering These estimates are approximately 11
other words, the difference between the the adjustments due to the menthol percent and 21 percent less than the
unadjusted baseline scenario and cigarette product standard. For this corresponding estimates that do not
menthol-adjusted baseline scenario of analysis, we assumed both rules—the account for the potential impact of a
the model should not be expected to menthol cigarette and flavored cigar menthol product standard. The
approximate the impact of a potential product standards—to be implemented reduction in premature deaths as a
menthol product standard. FDA’s in 2025. Specifically, we assumed that result of the nicotine product standard,
determination of the estimated public the avoided cigar-attributable deaths when accounting for a menthol product
health impact of the menthol product expected to result from the flavored standard, would result in 17.9 million
standard is discussed in detail in the cigar rule begin to occur 2 years after the life years gained by 2060, raising to 60.6
preamble to the proposed menthol rule’s effective date (2027) and would million life years gained by 2100. These
product standard. In the nicotine increase in a phased-in manner over a estimates represent a 9 percent and 21
population health model, FDA utilizes 30-year period. We then assumed a full percent reduction compared with the
results from an expert elicitation (Ref. annual mortality benefit of 780 avoided corresponding estimates under the main
562) developed to estimate changes in deaths would continue after 30 years analysis.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00067 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5098 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
TABLE 11—IMPACT OF PROPOSED NICOTINE PRODUCT STANDARD IMPLEMENTED IN 2027 ON PROJECTED SMOKING PREV-
ALENCE AND AVOIDED MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY FROM THE MAIN ANALYSIS (UNADJUSTED BASELINE SCENARIO)
AND WITH ADJUSTMENT FOR A MENTHOL CIGARETTE PRODUCT STANDARD IMPLEMENTED IN 2025
[Median (5th, 95th percentiles) estimates]
Estimates with
Estimates from adjustment for a
Year/period
main analysis menthol cigarette
standard
Cigarette Smoking Prevalence (%)
2040 ............................................................................................................................................................. 0.2 (0.07, 4.0) 0.1 (0.06, 2.8)
2060 ............................................................................................................................................................. 0.2 (0.07, 2.2) 0.1 (0.05, 1.4)
2080 ............................................................................................................................................................. 0.2 (0.06, 2.0) 0.1 (0.05, 1.3)
2100 ............................................................................................................................................................. 0.2 (0.06, 1.9) 0.1 (0.05, 1.2)
Cumulative Tobacco-Attributable Deaths Avoided (Millions)
2040 ............................................................................................................................................................. 0.4 (0.1, 0.5) 0.4 (0.1, 0.5)
2060 ............................................................................................................................................................. 1.8 (0.4, 2.0) 1.6 (0.4, 1.7)
2080 ............................................................................................................................................................. 3.1 (1.0, 3.4) 2.6 (0.7, 2.8)
2100 ............................................................................................................................................................. 4.3 (1.6, 4.6) 3.4 (1.1, 3.6)
Cumulative Life Years Gained (Millions)
2040 ............................................................................................................................................................. 2.0 (0.2, 2.7) 2.0 (0.2, 2.6)
2060 ............................................................................................................................................................. 19.6 (3.6, 22.7) 17.9 (3.4, 20.4)
2080 ............................................................................................................................................................. 47.4 (12.5, 52.5) 40.6 (10.3, 44.5)
2100 ............................................................................................................................................................. 76.4 (26.5, 82.5) 60.6 (19.2, 65.3)
Cumulative QALYs Gained from Reduced Smoking Morbidity (Millions)
2040 ............................................................................................................................................................. 9.6 (2.7, 10.0) 7.8 (2.1, 8.1)
2060 ............................................................................................................................................................. 24.0 (10.1, 24.7) 17.5 (7.0, 17.9)
2080 ............................................................................................................................................................. 38.2 (18.5, 39.2) 26.1 (11.9, 26.6)
2100 ............................................................................................................................................................. 53.1 (27.5, 54.4) 34.9 (17.0, 35.7)
Table 12 presents the impact results by 2060, in the United States, and 30 percent less than the
of the nicotine product standard approximately 45,600 deaths due to corresponding estimates without the
implemented in 2027, using baseline non-premium cigar use will be averted, potential impact of a product standard
assumptions adjusted for the effect of a rising to approximately 164,000 deaths for flavored cigars.
flavored cigar product standard avoided by 2100 (table 12). In general,
implemented in 2024. We estimate that these estimates are approximately 17
TABLE 12—PROJECTED NUMBER OF TOBACCO-ATTRIBUTABLE DEATHS FROM NON-PREMIUM CIGAR USE AVOIDED FOR AS
A RESULT OF A NICOTINE PRODUCT STANDARD IMPLEMENTED IN 2027 FROM THE MAIN ANALYSIS AND WITH ADJUST-
MENT FOR FLAVORED CIGAR AND MENTHOL CIGARETTE PRODUCT STANDARDS IMPLEMENTED IN 2025
Cumulative non-premium
Cumulative non-premium
cigar-attributable deaths
Year Percentiles cigar-attributable deaths
avoided with flavored cigar
avoided from main analysis
and menthol cigarette standards
2040 .............................. Median (5th, 95th) .............................................. 8,900 (1,000, 11,000) 8,000 (1,000, 9,500)
2060 .............................. Median (5th, 95th) .............................................. 54,800 (13,200, 60,500) 45,600 (11,100, 49,700)
2080 .............................. Median (5th, 95th) .............................................. 134,7000 (46,000, 144,100) 107,700 (35,000, 114,500)
2100 .............................. Median (5th, 95th) .............................................. 214,700 (91,600, 225,800) 164,000 (65,000, 172,100)
G. Conclusion considered alone, as well as adjusted for currently smoke cigarettes and/or
the inclusion of other tobacco product certain other combusted tobacco
FDA has considered scientific
evidence related to the likely impact of standards: prohibition of menthol as a products would stop smoking
the proposed rule establishing a characterizing flavor in cigarettes and altogether, yielding significant health
maximum nicotine level in cigarettes prohibition of all characterizing flavors benefits from smoking cessation.
and certain other combusted tobacco (other than tobacco) in cigars. Based on Additionally, we find that the proposed
products on people who currently do these considerations, we find that the standard is appropriate for the
not use these products, people who proposed tobacco product standard is protection of the public health because
currently use these products, and the appropriate for the protection of the it would decrease the likelihood that
U.S. population as a whole. The impact public health because it would increase people who do not smoke cigarettes
of the proposed standard was the likelihood that many people who and/or use certain other combusted
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00068 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5099
tobacco products—particularly youth secondhand smoke among people who it would decrease the likelihood that
and young adults—who experiment do not smoke cigarettes, decreased people who do not smoke cigarettes
with combusted tobacco products will potential years of life lost, decreased and/or certain other combusted tobacco
become addicted to these products, disability, and improved quality of life products—particularly youth and young
thereby decreasing progression to for current and future generations to adults—who experiment with them and
regular use, resulting in reduced come. initiate use, develop an addiction to
tobacco-related morbidity and mortality While preventing initiation to regular nicotine, and progress to regular use as
associated with combusted tobacco cigarette smoking and combusted result of that addiction, thereby greatly
product use. The proposed standard tobacco product use by even modest reducing the chances of suffering from
would also yield benefits in terms of amounts carries the greatest potential tobacco-related disease or death. Across
reduced mortality as a result of reduced from this proposed standard to improve the population, these changes in
secondhand smoke exposure, smoking- population health in the long term, FDA cigarette smoking behavior and
related fires, smoking-related perinatal anticipates that the proposed standard combusted tobacco product use would
conditions, and use of alternative would produce substantial short- and lead to lower disease and death in the
tobacco products. long-term health benefits resulting from United States in both the short-term and
Tobacco use is the leading decreased consumption and increased in the future, due to diminished
preventable cause of disease and death cessation among people who currently exposure to tobacco smoke among both
in the United States. Cigarettes are smoke cigarettes or other combusted people who smoke cigarettes and people
responsible for 480,000 premature tobacco products and wish to decrease who do not smoke cigarettes.
deaths every year from many diseases, use or quit. In the United States, there In addition to the determination that
put a substantial burden on the U.S. are currently approximately 39 million the proposed product is appropriate for
healthcare system, and cause massive people ages 12 and older who smoke the public health, FDA anticipates the
economic losses to society (Ref. 1 at p. combusted tobacco products (Refs. 275 proposed product standard also will
659–666). Even modest reductions in and 281). As previously described, the improve health outcomes among
the percentage of people initiating and health benefits of smoking cessation are populations that are disproportionately
modest increases in the percentage of substantial. FDA’s population health impacted by tobacco use and tobacco-
people quitting smoking would lead to model estimates that approximately 1.8 related morbidity and mortality, such as
substantial reductions in the annual million deaths in the United States due adolescents as well as those with mental
smoking-attributable deaths and fewer to tobacco would be avoided by the year health and substance use disorders. As
cases of disease attributed to 2060, rising to 4.3 million by the end of
previously described, adolescence is a
combustible tobacco products in the the century. The reduction in premature
period of significant vulnerability
United States. deaths attributable to the product
regarding the onset and progression of
In the United States, approximately standard would result in 19.6 million
tobacco use. Additionally, cigarette
362,000 youth (ages 12–17) smoked life years gained by 2060 and 76.4
smoking is disproportionately prevalent
their first cigarette in 2021 (Ref. 552). million life years gained by 2100.
among persons with symptoms of
Additionally, nearly 90 percent of Beyond averted deaths, societal benefits
mental health disorders and substance
adults who currently smoke cigarettes would include reduced smoking-related
use disorders, resulting in increased risk
daily in the United States report having morbidity and health disparities,
of tobacco-related morbidity and
smoked their first cigarette by the age of diminished exposure to secondhand
mortality in these groups. Accordingly,
18 (Ref. 1). Nicotine is a highly smoke among people who do not smoke
the proposed product standard is
addictive substance, and multiple cigarettes, decreased potential years of
anticipated to promote better public
studies have shown that symptoms of life lost, decreased disability, and
health outcomes across these population
nicotine dependence can arise early improved quality of life among people
groups.
after youth start smoking cigarettes, who formerly smoked cigarettes.
even among those who smoke cigarettes FDA’s finding that the proposed IX. Additional Considerations and
infrequently (Refs. 24, 65, and 93). product standard would be appropriate Requests for Comment
Reducing the addictive potential of for the protection of the public health is
A. Section 907 of the FD&C Act
combusted cigarettes and certain other reasonable and well-supported by
tobacco products via establishing a scientific evidence. Cigarettes are the FDA is required by section 907 of the
maximum level of nicotine in these most toxic consumer product when FD&C Act to consider the following
products would help to decrease the used as intended, and nicotine is the information submitted in connection
likelihood that people who do not primary constituent in cigarettes and with a proposed product standard:
smoke cigarettes and/or use certain other tobacco products that causes and • For a proposed product standard to
other combusted tobacco products— maintains addiction. Given the existing require the reduction or elimination of
particularly youth and young adults— scientific evidence described in sections an additive, constituent (including
who experiment with them will develop VIII.B and VIII.C of this document, FDA smoke constituent), or other component
addiction to nicotine and progress to finds that the proposed product of a tobacco product because FDA has
regular use, thereby greatly reducing the standard is appropriate for the found that the additive, constituent
chances of suffering from tobacco- protection of the public health because (including a smoke constituent), or
related disease and death. FDA it would increase the likelihood that other component is or may be harmful,
anticipates that the proposed standard many people who currently smoke scientific evidence submitted by any
would produce substantial health cigarettes and/or certain other party objecting to the proposed standard
benefits. Even small changes in combusted tobacco products who wish demonstrating that the proposed
initiation and cessation would result in to stop smoking altogether, would be standard will not reduce or eliminate
a significant reduction in the burden of able to do so, yielding significant health the risk of illness or injury (section
death and disease in the United States benefits from smoking cessation. 907(a)(3)(B)(ii) of the FD&C Act).
caused by smoking, including Additionally, we find that the proposed • Information submitted regarding the
reductions in smoking-related morbidity standard is appropriate for the technical achievability of compliance
and mortality, diminished exposure to protection of the public health because with the standard, including with regard
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00069 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5100 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
to any differences related to the B. Pathways to Market modification reduced the nicotine
technical achievability of compliance To legally market a new tobacco content to meet the standard and did
with such standard for products in the product38in the United States, a not cause the new product to raise any
same class containing nicotine not made tobacco product must receive different questions of public health, and
or derived from tobacco and products authorization from FDA permitting the provide a certification that no other
containing nicotine made or derived marketing of the new tobacco product modifications were made to the new
from tobacco (section 907(b)(1) of the under one of three premarket review tobacco product other than those made
FD&C Act). pathways: (1) the applicant obtains an to reduce the level of nicotine.
• All other information submitted, order under section 910(c)(1)(A)(i) of the An applicant may also be able to use
FD&C Act (order after review of a the SE Exemption pathway under
including information concerning the
premarket tobacco product application section 905(j)(3)(A) of the FD&C Act to
countervailing effects of the tobacco
under section 910(b)); (2) the applicant the extent the applicant is modifying a
product standard on the health of
obtains an order finding the new legally marketed tobacco product by
adolescent tobacco users, adult tobacco
tobacco product to be substantially adding or deleting a tobacco additive, or
users, or nontobacco users, such as the
equivalent to a predicate tobacco increasing or decreasing the quantity of
creation of a significant demand for
product and in compliance with the an existing tobacco additive if such
contraband or other tobacco products
requirements of the FD&C Act under modification would be a minor
that do not meet the requirements of
section 910(a)(2)(A)(i) (order after modification. While the SE Exemption
chapter IX of the FD&C Act and the review of a Substantial Equivalence (SE) pathway may be a viable option in
significance of such demand (section Report submitted under section 905(j) of limited circumstances, FDA notes that
907(b)(2) of the FD&C Act). the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 387e(j))); or (3) the statutory definition of ‘‘additive’’
As required by section 907(c)(2) of the the applicant makes a request under 21 excludes tobacco or a pesticide
FD&C Act, FDA invites interested CFR 1107.1 and obtains an exemption chemical residue in or on raw tobacco
persons to submit a draft or proposed from the requirements related to SE or a pesticide chemical (section 900(1)
tobacco product standard for the (section 905(j)(3)(A)), and at least 90 of the FD&C Act). Therefore, to the
Agency’s consideration (section days before commercially marketing the extent modifications to a tobacco
907(c)(2)(B)) and comments on and product, submits a report under section product involve changes to the tobacco
information regarding structuring the 905(j) including the information (e.g., changes to the nicotine content of
required in section 905(j)(1)(A)(ii) and the tobacco used in a tobacco product),
standard so as not to advantage foreign-
(B) of the FD&C Act. such changes would render section
grown tobacco over domestically grown
Applicants may be able to use the SE 905(j)(3) of the FD&C Act inapplicable.
tobacco (section 907(c)(2)(C)) of the
pathway for products seeking to comply If a currently legally marketed tobacco
FD&C Act. In addition, FDA invites the
with this proposed product standard (if product is already in compliance with
Secretary of Agriculture to provide any
finalized) by making modifications to this proposed product standard, a
information or analysis that the
their products in a manner that FDA premarket authorization application
Secretary of Agriculture believes is
finds does not cause the new tobacco would not be needed.
relevant to the proposed tobacco
product to raise different questions of
FDA requests comments regarding
product standard (section 907(c)(2)(D) of public health. Applicants may be able to
changes manufacturers may make to
the FD&C Act). submit a streamlined SE Report
their tobacco products to comply with
With this proposed rule, FDA is containing information sufficient to this proposed product standard and
requesting all relevant documents and demonstrate that the changes to the what information and evidence they
information described in this section. subject of that SE Report do not cause might provide to satisfy the premarket
Such documents and information may the new tobacco product to raise review requirements of the Tobacco
be submitted in accordance with the different questions of public health and Control Act.
‘‘Instructions’’ included in the to certify that no other changes were
made to the new tobacco product as C. Considerations and Request for
preliminary information section of this
compared with the predicate product Comments on Scope of Products
document.
and that all other characteristics are
Section 907(d)(5) of the FD&C Act identical (see relevant provisions of the As indicated throughout this
document, FDA has determined that the
allows FDA to refer a proposed SE final rule codified at 21 CFR
proposed standard, which would apply
regulation for the establishment of a 1107.18(l)(2)). FDA has received
to cigarettes and certain other
tobacco product standard to the Tobacco numerous successful applications where
combusted finished tobacco products, is
Products Scientific Advisory Committee the manufacturer described all
appropriate for the protection of the
(TPSAC) at the Agency’s own initiative modification(s) between the new and
public health. It would cover the
or in response to a request that predicate tobacco product and provided
products that are responsible for the
demonstrates good cause for a referral a certification statement that all other
greatest amount of tobacco-related
and is made before the expiration of the characteristics are identical. For
morbidity and mortality. The proposed
comment period. Sections 917(c)(2) and example, for products modified to
scope of this rule—applying to
(c)(3) (21 U.S.C. 387q(c)(2) and (c)(3)) comply with this product standard, the
cigarettes (other than noncombusted
also provide that TPSAC shall provide applicant could demonstrate how the
cigarettes, such as HTPs that meet the
advice, information, and modification was made to the tobacco
definition of a cigarette), cigarette
recommendations on the effects of the filler, provide test data to show that the
tobacco, RYO tobacco, cigars (other than
alteration of the nicotine yields from
premium cigars), and pipe tobacco—is
tobacco products and regarding whether the 38 U P n r i o t d ed u c S ts ta t t h e a s t a w s e o r f e F c e o b m ru m ar e y r c 1 i 5 a , l l 2 y 0 m 07 a r ( k re e f t e e r d r e i d n appropriate to protect the public health
there is a threshold level below which to as ‘‘pre-existing tobacco products,’’ previously and is justified by existing evidence. We
nicotine yields do not produce referred to as ‘‘grandfathered products’’), are not request comments, data, and research
dependence on the tobacco product considered new tobacco products and do not regarding the proposed scope of this
require prior authorization to be legally marketed
involved, respectively. (section 910(a) of the FD&C Act). rule.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00070 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5101
FDA is not proposing to include However, waterpipe tobacco is FDA requests information and data
noncombusted cigarettes, such as HTPs significantly less likely to be smoked regarding the proposal to exclude
that meet the definition of a cigarette in daily. In fact, given the relative waterpipe tobacco from the scope of this
section 900(3) of the FD&C Act infrequency of waterpipe use, it is often proposed rule.
(proposed §1160.3 includes a definition reported in terms of monthly versus less FDA is not including noncombusted
of cigarette), within the scope of this than monthly use, rather than daily tobacco products, such as ENDS (which
proposed product standard. While versus non-daily. Data from Waves 1 include e-cigarettes) and smokeless
noncombusted cigarettes (such as HTPs) (2013–2014) and 2 (2014–2015) of the tobacco products, in the scope of this
that meet the definition of cigarette in PATH Study indicated that, among proposed product standard. FDA’s
the FD&C Act must adhere to existing adults who used waterpipes in the past approach in proposing this product
restrictions for cigarettes under FDA year, 77.1 percent reported less than standard for cigarettes and certain other
regulations, some of these products may monthly use at Wave 1; by Wave 2, 44.9 combusted tobacco products seeks to
deliver fewer or lower levels of some percent of these adults continued using protect public health by reducing
toxicants than combusted cigarettes waterpipe less than monthly, while 6.4 combusted tobacco product use (and
(Ref. 642). FDA recognizes that tobacco percent progressed to monthly or more therefore reducing exposure to harmful
products exist on a continuum of risk, frequent use (Ref. 643). For comparison, toxicants created through combustion)
with combusted cigarettes being the 59.1 percent of adults in the 2018 NHIS while potentially less harmful,
deadliest, and that certain specific who smoke cigarettes report daily use noncombusted tobacco products remain
products meeting the definition of a (Ref. 644). Wave 3 (2015–2016) PATH available for people who do not quit all
cigarette (e.g., some that are not Study data also indicate the infrequency tobacco-product use. As such, at this
combusted) may pose less risk to of daily waterpipe use: 0.1 percent of time, FDA is focusing this proposed rule
individuals who use these products or youth, 0.3 percent of young adults, and on nicotine levels in cigarettes and
to population health than other 0 percent of adults 25 and older certain other combusted products
products meeting the definition of a reported daily waterpipe use (Ref. 645). because combusted tobacco products are
cigarette. Comparatively, analysis from Wave 3 of responsible for the majority of death and
In general, as discussed in this disease due to tobacco use. Importantly,
the PATH study found that 0.6 percent
document, nicotine is the primary this action would also help to prevent
of youth, 11.4 percent of young adults,
addictive constituent in tobacco people who experiment with cigarettes
and 15.3 percent of adults older than 25
products, and it is the nicotine in such and cigars (mainly youth) from moving
reported daily cigarette smoking (Ref.
products that both creates and sustains beyond experimentation, developing an
646).
addiction, playing a significant role in addiction to nicotine, and progressing to
FDA acknowledges that the health
creating and perpetuating tobacco- regular use of combusted tobacco
consequences of waterpipe usage are far
related negative health consequences. products as a result of that addiction.
from innocuous. People who use
While these effects raise concerns in the We request comments, data, and
waterpipes are exposed to many of the
context of any tobacco product—none of research regarding the proposed scope
same toxicants as people who smoke
which is without risk—FDA recognizes of this rule.
cigarettes, and due to the extended
that certain products that meet the
duration of each waterpipe session (i.e., D. Considerations and Request for
definition of cigarette in the FD&C Act
approximately 1 hour), waterpipe use Comments on the Potential for Illicit
may present different considerations
may lead to higher toxicant exposure Trade
with respect to this proposed product
standard. Accordingly, FDA requests per session than toxicant exposure from The implementation of a maximum
comments, data, and research regarding one cigarette (Refs. 647 and 648). Thus, nicotine level in cigarettes and certain
the proposal to exclude noncombusted people who use waterpipes are likely other combusted tobacco products could
cigarettes (such as HTPs that are subject to many of the same severe result in some people seeking NNC
cigarettes) from the scope of this negative health effects as people who combusted tobacco products through
proposed rule, including any data that smoke cigarettes (Ref. 649). illicit trade markets. FDA is also
could justify otherwise. However, FDA does not anticipate considering whether illicit trade could
FDA considered including waterpipe significant migration to waterpipe usage occur as a result of a nicotine product
tobacco products within the scope of under the proposed product standard. standard and whether such activity
this proposed product standard; Waterpipes as currently marketed are could significantly undermine the
however, the Agency has determined generally large and require time- public health benefits of the product
that waterpipe tobacco involves consuming preparation, leading to an standard.
profoundly different use behaviors than approximate waterpipe smoking session Since the enactment of the Tobacco
combusted cigarettes, which makes it an of 1 hour (Ref. 650). The limited Control Act, FDA has been committed to
unlikely substitute for cigarettes. We accessibility and mobility of waterpipes studying and understanding the
therefore do not propose including as generally currently used contribute to potential effects of a product standard
waterpipe tobacco products within the their predominant intermittent usage on the illicit tobacco market. As part of
scope of this proposed rule. patterns (Ref. 650). FDA assesses that FDA’s consideration of possible
Data on frequency of use differentiates these aspects of waterpipe design would regulations, the Agency asked the NRC
waterpipe tobacco from cigarettes. For similarly substantially limit their utility and IOM of the National Academy of
instance, according to the 2024 NYTS, as a substitute for cigarettes and other Sciences (now the National Academies)
0.7 percent of middle and high school combusted tobacco products that would to assess the international illicit tobacco
students (or approximately 190,000 be subject the proposed product market, including variations by country;
students) reported using waterpipe standard, especially as compared to the the effects of various policy mechanisms
tobacco within the previous 30 days, portability and ease of use of many HTP, on the market; and the applicability of
compared with estimates for previous ENDS, and other noncombusted tobacco international experiences to the United
30-day cigarette use (1.4 percent; products that are currently legally States (Ref. 560). In 2015, the NRC/IOM
380,000 students) and cigar use (1.2 marketed and not subject to the issued its final report entitled
percent; 330000 students) (Ref. 3). proposed product standard. ‘‘Understanding the U.S. Illicit Tobacco
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00071 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5102 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Market: Characteristics, Policy Context, sales to consumers take place (e.g., well-established that people who smoke
and Lessons from International across State lines). Enforcement against are price-sensitive, and there is a direct
Experiences,’’ finding that, although such illicit trade is outside the scope of correlation with the increased price of
there is insufficient evidence to draw FDA’s authority (as FDA does not cigarettes and reductions in
firm conclusions regarding how the U.S. enforce tax laws) and is complicated by consumption (Ref. 652), showing for
illicit tobacco market would respond to the inability to distinguish tax-paid every ten percent increase in price,
regulations requiring a reduction in the from tax-evading cigarette packs in most there is an overall reduction in
nicotine content of these products, instances. However, due to the consumption of 3–5 percent, and youth
demand for illicit cigarettes would be reduction of nicotine in combusted smoking decreases by 6–7 percent. This
limited because some people who tobacco products nationwide, a lack of price sensitivity also contributes to the
smoke would quit, and others would supply would likely limit illicit trade of willingness of people who smoke
use modified products (e.g., VLNC NNC cigarettes and certain other cigarettes to shift consumption toward
cigarettes) or seek legal alternatives (Ref. combusted tobacco products once a non-cigarette tobacco products in times
560 2015 at p. 9). In addition, in March product standard is in place. Illicit of economic or product constraint (Refs.
2018, FDA issued a draft concept paper, manufacturing of NNC cigarettes at a 345, 346, and 349). Additionally, there
entitled ‘‘Illicit Trade in Tobacco scale large enough to diminish the is an ‘‘inconvenience cost’’ to the
Products after Implementation of a Food public health benefits of this proposed purchase of illicit tobacco products that
and Drug Administration Product product standard would be difficult to rises and falls depending upon the
Standard,’’ as an initial step in assessing disguise from Federal, State, and local location of illegal sales, reliability of
the possible health effects of a tobacco enforcement authorities. Moreover, supply, fear of embarrassment and legal
product standard in the form of demand importation across international borders penalties, and more (Ref. 560 at p. 67).
for contraband or nonconforming is substantially more difficult than Although illicit NNC cigarettes and
tobacco products (83 FR 11754). Among across State borders, particularly for the certain other combusted tobacco
other issues, the draft concept paper volume necessary to sustain nicotine products will not be subject to taxes,
examined the factors that might support addiction in people who smoke. participants in any illicit market will
or hinder the establishment of a Additionally, while it would remain demand profits sufficient to cover both
persistent illicit trade market related to legal for domestic cigarette their costs as well as compensate for the
a product standard (Ref. 44). manufacturers to produce NNC risks of enforcement, limiting how low
Additionally, in the Nicotine ANPRM, cigarettes and certain other combusted they can price the illicit tobacco
FDA expressed interest in data tobacco products for export (as products. As a result, when the cost or
regarding possible increases in illicit previously described in section III.C of effort required to obtain illicit products
trade and its effect on the marketplace this document), it is unclear the extent increases, people who smoke may
in the event that a nicotine tobacco to which there would be diversion of switch their preference from NNC
product standard is finalized. legally manufactured products for combusted tobacco products to VLNC
Comments were submitted by members export that are subsequently sold versions (Ref. 391), to other legal
of the tobacco industry, public health illegally domestically. As noted in tobacco products, and/or renew their
organizations, academic researchers, multiple FDA reports to Congress cessation efforts. Each of these
and the public. Comments varied in regarding U.S. tobacco product exports, alternatives reduces the number of
their conclusions as to how significant after the product standard prohibiting potential buyers of illicit products,
illicit trade might be after characterizing flavors (other than lowering the incentives to try, create,
implementation of an FDA product tobacco or menthol) in cigarettes was and sustain such markets.
standard, but no information was implemented, the U.S. Census Bureau Related to concerns about
submitted in response to the Nicotine surveyed the vast majority of domestic enforcement against individual
ANPRM that caused FDA to revise its manufacturers and found no evidence consumers for possessing or using
overall assessment about the difficulties that any continued to manufacture nonconforming tobacco products
in establishing sustained, significant flavored cigarettes or their components acquired through an illicit market,
illicit trade markets that are able to or parts (Ref. 651). Importantly, and FDA’s enforcement will only address
evade enforcement authorities. relevant to any continued domestic manufacturers, distributors,
Establishing and maintaining illicit manufacture for export, section 920(d) wholesalers, importers, and retailers.
markets in relevant tobacco products of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 387t(d)) This regulation does not include a
will be challenging, and to the extent requires that manufacturers and prohibition on individual consumer
that they emerge, it is unlikely they will distributors notify the Attorney General possession or use of nonconforming
be significant enough to outweigh the and the Secretary of the Treasury of product acquired through an illicit
benefits of the product standard. illicit trade activities (such as import, market, and FDA cannot and will not
Although some people who smoke may export, distribution, or diversion), enforce against individual consumers
seek to purchase illicit products if increasing the overall vigilance on the for possession or use of NNC cigarettes
available and accessible, the NRC/IOM matter. Finally, as the NRC/IOM Report or other combusted tobacco products
report stated that this ‘‘would require explains, comprehensive interventions covered by this proposed product
established distribution networks and by several countries show it is possible standard. In addition, State and local
new sources of product (which would to reduce the size of the illicit tobacco law enforcement agencies do not
either have to be smuggled from other market through enforcement enforce the FD&C Act. These entities do
countries or produced illegally) to create mechanisms and collaborations across not and cannot take enforcement actions
a supply of cigarettes with prohibited jurisdictions (Ref. 560). against any violation of chapter IX of the
features’’ (Ref. 560 at p. 9). The current Research also has shown that the Act or this regulation on FDA’s behalf.
illicit cigarette trade in the United States choice between VLNC and NNC FDA recognizes concern about how
is predominantly based on tax evasion cigarettes can be influenced by factors State and local law enforcement
and is facilitated by ease of access to such as cost (see section VI.B of this agencies enforce their own laws in a
tobacco products close to where the document for further discussion). It is manner that may impact equity and
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00072 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5103
community safety and seeks comments develops after this proposed product noncombusted cigarettes, such as HTPs
on how FDA can best make clear the standard is finalized, FDA has the that meet the definition of a cigarette),
respective roles of FDA and State and authority to take enforcement actions cigarette tobacco, RYO tobacco, cigars
local law enforcement. and other steps regarding the sale and (other than premium cigars), and pipe
FDA is not proposing to ban any distribution of illicit tobacco products, tobacco (other than waterpipe tobacco).
category of tobacco products with this including those imported or purchased These products are defined in proposed
proposed product standard, and online. FDA conducts routine §1160.3. As stated throughout this
authorized products that are not subject surveillance of sales, distribution, preamble, this proposed product
to the proposed product standard will marketing, and advertising related to standard focuses on cigarettes and
remain legally available. Therefore, this tobacco products and takes appropriate certain other combusted tobacco
proposed product standard is not actions when violations occur. If this products given their addictiveness,
expected to lead to a surge in illicit product standard is finalized as availability as migration and dual use
tobacco product use. In reaching this proposed and goes into effect, it would candidates with cigarettes, and the
conclusion, FDA has considered several be illegal to import cigarettes and extent of tobacco-related death and
factors that are likely to affect the certain other combusted tobacco disease associated with such products.
potential for illicit trade. For example, products that exceed 0.70 mg nicotine As stated in section IX.C of this
FDA anticipates that a nationwide per gram of total tobacco, and such document, FDA requests comment
standard that prohibits the manufacture products would be subject to import regarding the scope of products covered
(other than for export as previously examination and refusal of admission by this proposed rule.
described in section III.C of this under the FD&C Act. Similarly, it would Proposed §1160.1(b) would prohibit
document) and sale of cigarettes and be illegal to sell or distribute cigarettes the distribution, sale, or offering for
certain other combusted tobacco and certain other combusted tobacco distribution or sale within the United
products that exceed the maximum products that do not comply with this States finished tobacco products within
nicotine level set by this proposed product standard, including those sold the scope of the rule that are not in
product standard, coupled with FDA’s online, and doing so may result in FDA compliance with the tobacco product
authority to take enforcement actions initiating enforcement or regulatory standard. For example, FDA would
and other steps regarding the sale and actions. We note that the Prevent All consider such finished tobacco products
distribution of illicit tobacco products, Cigarette Trafficking Act of 2009 to be noncompliant if they contain a
would limit the manufacture and establishes restrictions that make nicotine level that exceeds the proposed
distribution of these products. FDA also cigarettes generally nonmailable maximum nicotine level set forth in
expects that a nationwide product through the U.S. Postal Service, subject proposed §1160.10. Additionally,
standard would eliminate the use of to certain exceptions (18 U.S.C. 1716E). manufacturers and importers would not
online retailers to purchase illicit Outside of these exceptions, the U.S. be allowed to enter or introduce into
tobacco products as well as any Postal Service cannot accept or transmit domestic commerce any finished
incentive to travel within the United any package that it knows, or has tobacco product (i.e., cigarettes,
States in search of jurisdictions without reasonable cause to believe, contains cigarette tobacco, RYO tobacco, cigars,
a nicotine product standard because no nonmailable cigarettes, smokeless and pipe tobacco) that does not comply
such jurisdictions would exist. FDA tobacco, or ENDS.39 with the requirements of the final rule,
thus anticipates that the rule would irrespective of the date of manufacture.
X. Description of Proposed Regulation
result in much less illicit trade than Proposed §1160.1(c) would prohibit
observed in the case of a State or local This proposed rule would establish a the manufacture within the United
requirement and that any such trade new part 1160 that would set a States of finished tobacco products
would be significantly outweighed by maximum level of nicotine in finished within the scope of the rule that are not
the benefits of the rule. Even if some cigarettes and certain other finished in compliance with the tobacco product
amount of illicit trade develops (Refs. 42 combusted tobacco products. Part 1160 standard unless such tobacco products
and 653 discuss projected impacts of would describe the scope of the are intended for export and are eligible
various rates of potential illicit trade), it proposed regulation, applicable for export under section 801(e)(1) of the
would have to be of significantly greater definitions, the establishment of a FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 381(e)(1)). A
magnitude than any previously seen maximum nicotine level in products tobacco product intended for export
illicit markets in order to outweigh the covered by this proposed rule, product shall not be deemed to be in violation
significant public health benefits of this testing and related requirements, and of section 907 of the FD&C Act or this
proposed standard, and it would have to recordkeeping requirements. product standard if it meets the criteria
continue to exist at those levels despite enumerated in section 801(e)(1),
A. General Provisions (Proposed
the various enforcement agencies and including not being sold or offered for
Subpart A)
tools involved. sale in domestic commerce.
FDA requests comments, including 1. Scope (Proposed §1160.1)
2. Definitions (Proposed §1160.3)
supporting data and research, regarding
Proposed §1160.1(a) would provide
whether and to what extent this Proposed §1160.3 provides the
that this part sets out a tobacco product
proposed rule would result in an definitions for the terms used in the
standard under the FD&C Act to limit
increase in illicit trade in NNC proposed product standard. Several of
nicotine yield by setting a maximum
cigarettes and certain other combusted these definitions are included in the
nicotine content level for certain
tobacco products covered by the FD&C Act or have been used in other
finished tobacco products. We are
proposed nicotine product standard and regulatory documents.
proposing that this product standard
how any such increase could impact • Accessory: Consistent with 21 CFR
would cover the following finished
public health. Data or other reliable 1140.3 and the Consolidated
tobacco products: cigarettes (other than
information that do not rely on Appropriations Act, 2022 (Pub. L. 117–
estimates of current, interstate tax- 103), FDA proposes to define
39These restrictions were updated to include
evading illicit trade would be ‘‘accessory’’ as any product that is
similar prohibitions on the shipment of ENDS in
particularly relevant. If an illicit market 2021 (86 FR 58399, October 21, 2021). intended or reasonably expected to be
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00073 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5104 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
used with or for the human Product Manufacturing Practice (TPMP) include the handing or transfer of a
consumption of a tobacco product; does (see https://www.federalregister.gov/ tobacco product from one consumer to
not contain tobacco or nicotine from any documents/2023/03/10/2023-04591/ another for personal consumption.
source and is not made or derived from requirements-for-tobacco-product- • Component or part: Consistent with
tobacco; and meets either of the manufacturing-practice) includes a 21 CFR 1140.3, FDA proposes to define
following: (1) is not intended or proposed definition of ‘‘batch,’’ and this ‘‘component or part’’ as any software or
reasonably expected to affect or alter the rulemaking’s provision is modeled on assembly of materials intended or
performance, composition, constituents, the proposed TPMP provision. Pursuant reasonably expected: (1) to alter or affect
or characteristics of a tobacco product; to proposed §1160.12, manufacturers the tobacco product’s performance,
or (2) is intended or reasonably would be required to conduct batch composition, constituents, or
expected to affect or maintain the testing and maintain those records. characteristics or (2) to be used with or
performance, composition, constituents, • Cigar: FDA proposes to define a for the human consumption of a tobacco
or characteristics of a tobacco product; ‘‘cigar’’ as a tobacco product that: (1) is product. The term excludes anything
but (i) solely controls moisture and/or not a cigarette and (2) is a roll of tobacco that is an accessory of a tobacco
temperature of a stored product; or (ii) wrapped in leaf tobacco or any product. Components or parts of
solely provides an external heat source substance containing tobacco. This cigarettes, cigarette tobacco, and RYO
to initiate but not maintain combustion definition was used in the seven tobacco, as three of the originally
of a tobacco product. Accessories of consent orders that the FTC entered into regulated products under the FD&C Act,
cigarettes, cigarette tobacco, and RYO with the largest mass marketers of cigars are considered ‘‘tobacco products’’ and,
tobacco, as three of the originally- (see, e.g., In re Swisher International, therefore, would be subject to this
regulated products under the FD&C Act, Inc., Docket No. C–3964 (FTC August proposed product standard (if finalized).
are considered ‘‘tobacco products’’ and, 18, 2000)) and also is codified at 21 CFR Examples of cigarette components or
therefore, would be subject to this 1143.1. The cigar wrapper would be parts that would be subject to this
considered a ‘‘component or part’’ of a proposed product standard include
proposed product standard (if finalized).
cigar (see definition herein) and, cigarette paper and filters. In addition,
However, accessories of other tobacco
therefore, would be covered by this components or parts of other tobacco
products (e.g., cigars) are not regulated
proposed product standard. As products (e.g., cigars) are regulated as
as ‘‘tobacco products’’ pursuant to
discussed elsewhere in this document ‘‘tobacco products’’ pursuant to FDA’s
FDA’s final deeming rule (81 FR 28974
and in proposed §1160.1, premium final deeming rule (81 FR 28974 at
at 29015–29016, May 10, 2016) and,
cigars are excluded from the scope of 29015–29016) and, therefore, would be
therefore, would not be subject to this
this proposed rule. subject to this proposed product
proposed product standard. Examples of
• Cigarette: As defined in section standard (if finalized). Some examples
such accessories would be ashtrays,
900(3) of the FD&C Act, the term of such components or parts include
cigar clips, and pipe pouches, because
‘‘cigarette’’: (1) means a product that: (i) cigar blunt wraps, removable tips,
they do not contain tobacco or nicotine
is a tobacco product; and (ii) meets the mouthpieces, and filters. These
from any source, are not made or
definition of the term ‘‘cigarette’’ in examples generally are intended or
derived from tobacco, and do not affect
section 3(1) of the Federal Cigarette reasonably expected to alter or affect the
or alter the performance, composition,
Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. performance, composition, constituents,
constituents, or characteristics of a
1332(1)); and (2) includes tobacco, in or characteristics of a tobacco product.
tobacco product. However, if such a
any form, that is functional in the If a liquid nicotine product or other
product was intended or reasonably
product, which, because of its tobacco product is intended or
expected to affect the performance of a
appearance, the type of tobacco used in reasonably expected to alter the nicotine
tobacco product (e.g., nicotine
the filler, or its packaging and labeling, content of any tobacco product covered
impregnated ash tray), it would no
is likely to be offered to, or purchased by this proposed rule, such liquid
longer be considered an accessory and
by, consumers as a cigarette or as RYO nicotine or other tobacco product would
would be subject to the proposed
tobacco. be considered a component or part of a
product standard. • Cigarette tobacco: As defined in finished tobacco product covered under
• Batch: FDA proposes to define section 900(4) of the FD&C Act, the term the rule’s scope and, therefore, would be
‘‘batch’’ as a specific identified amount ‘‘cigarette tobacco’’ means any product in violation of the rule if the amount of
of a finished tobacco product produced that consists of loose tobacco that is nicotine in the finished tobacco product
in a unit of time or quantity and that is intended for use by consumers in a exceeds 0.70 mg of nicotine per gram of
intended to have the same cigarette. Unless otherwise stated, the total tobacco. With respect to these
specifications. FDA proposes to give requirements applicable to cigarettes definitions, FDA notes that
tobacco product manufacturers under this chapter also apply to ‘‘component’’ and ‘‘part’’ are separate
flexibility to determine what unit of cigarette tobacco. and distinct terms within chapter IX of
time or quantity is appropriate for their • Commercial distribution: Consistent the FD&C Act. However, for purposes of
product, and how batches would be with 21 CFR 1107.12, FDA proposes to this rule, FDA is using the terms
designated. For example, manufacturers define ‘‘commercial distribution’’ as any ‘‘component’’ and ‘‘part’’
likely would have, as part of existing distribution of a finished tobacco interchangeably and without
manufacturing processes, defined a product, whether domestic or imported, emphasizing a distinction between the
‘‘batch’’ for cigarette production, which to consumers or to any person, but does terms. FDA may clarify the distinctions
is almost continuous, differently than a not include interplant transfers of a between ‘‘component’’ and ‘‘part’’ in the
batch for smokeless tobacco, which tobacco product between establishments future.
likely would be defined based on the within the same parent, subsidiary, and/ • Finished tobacco product:
amount processed in a vat through the or affiliate company, nor does it include Consistent with 21 CFR 1107.12, FDA
fermentation process. Currently, there is providing a tobacco product for product proposes to define a ‘‘finished tobacco
no definition of ‘‘batch’’ for tobacco testing where such product is not made product’’ to mean a tobacco product,
products. However, the proposed available for consumption or resale. including all components and parts,
regulation Requirements for Tobacco ‘‘Commercial distribution’’ does not sealed in final packaging (e.g., filters or
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00074 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5105
filter tubes sold to consumers separately be smoked in a pipe. However, this • Tobacco product manufacturer: As
or as part of kits) or in the final form in definition specifically excludes tobacco defined in section 900(20) of the FD&C
which it is intended to be sold to labeled and sold exclusively for use in Act, the term ‘‘tobacco product
consumers (e.g., tobacconists selling a waterpipe (i.e., hookah tobacco). As manufacturer’’ means any person,
cigars individually from a box or pipe discussed in section IX.C of this including a repacker or relabeler, who:
tobacco filler by weight). Examples of document, FDA is not proposing to (1) manufactures, fabricates, assembles,
finished tobacco products include a include waterpipe tobacco within the processes, or labels a tobacco product or
pack of cigarettes or a bag of RYO or scope of this product standard. (2) imports a finished tobacco product
pipe tobacco. • Rework: FDA proposes to define for sale or distribution in the United
• Manufacturing code: FDA proposes ‘‘rework’’ as action taken on a States.
to define ‘‘manufacturing code’’ as any nonconforming tobacco product to • Total tobacco: FDA proposes to
distinctive sequence or combination of ensure that the product meets the define the term ‘‘total tobacco’’ as the
letters, numbers, or symbols that begins specifications and other requirements of tobacco filler (defined in proposed
with the manufacturing date, followed this part before it is released for §1160.3) and any other tobacco or
by the batch number, and concludes commercial distribution. tobacco-derived material used as part of
with ‘‘-NS.’’ This information would • Roll-your-own tobacco: As modeled a tobacco product. For cigars (i.e., those
help determine the product’s history
after section 900(15) of the FD&C Act, cigars that are covered by this proposed
(e.g., batch testing records) and assist
FDA proposes to define the term ‘‘roll- product standard, as defined in
manufacturers and FDA in the event of
your-own tobacco’’ (or RYO) as any proposed §1160.3), the tobacco
a nonconforming tobacco product
tobacco product which, because of its included in the wrapper and binder
investigation and any corrective actions
appearance, type, packaging, or labeling, would be part of the ‘‘total tobacco.’’
that stem from such investigation.
• Manufacturing date: FDA proposes is suitable for use and likely to be The nicotine content in the total tobacco
offered to, or purchased by, consumers of the finished tobacco product must not
to define ‘‘manufacturing date’’ as the
as tobacco for making cigarettes or exceed the proposed maximum nicotine
month, day, and year in 2-digit
cigars. This product is frequently used level.
numerical values in the format
(MMDDYY) that a finished tobacco interchangeably with cigarette tobacco • United States: As defined in section
and pipe tobacco (as defined in this
product is packaged for distribution. 900(22) of the FD&C Act, the term
section).
The manufacturing date is included in • Specification: We propose to define ‘‘United States’’ means the 50 States of
the manufacturing code, which can be the United States of America and the
‘‘specification’’ as any requirement with
used by the manufacturer and FDA to District of Columbia, the
which a product, process, service, or
help determine the product’s history Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam,
other activity must conform. A tobacco
(e.g., batch testing history) in the event the Virgin Islands, American Samoa,
product specification is a requirement
of a nonconforming tobacco product Wake Island, Midway Islands, Kingman
established by the manufacturer,
investigation. As stated in section X.C of Reef, Johnston Atoll, the Northern
including a requirement established to
this document, FDA requests comment Mariana Islands, and any other trust
ensure that the tobacco product meets
regarding the manufacturing code territory or possession of the United
any applicable product standard under
requirements in this proposed rule. States.
• Nicotine: FDA proposes to define section 907 of the FD&C Act.
• Tobacco filler: FDA proposes to B. Product Requirements (Proposed
‘‘nicotine’’ as the chemical substance
define ‘‘tobacco filler’’ as cut, ground, Subpart B)
named 3–1(1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinyl)
powdered, or leaf tobacco or other
pyridine or C[10]H[14]N[2], including 1. Maximum Nicotine Level (Proposed
nicotine-containing substances in a
any salt or complex of nicotine, derived §1160.10)
finished tobacco product. For portioned
from any source.
• Nonconforming tobacco product: tobacco products, the material enclosing FDA is proposing to regulate nicotine
FDA proposes to define any tobacco or nicotine-containing yield by requiring that a finished
‘‘nonconforming tobacco product’’ as substances (e.g., cigarette paper) is not tobacco product contain no more than
any tobacco product that does not meet considered tobacco filler. 0.70 mg of nicotine per gram of total
the requirements of §1160.10 (nicotine • Tobacco product: As defined in tobacco. As stated in proposed §1160.3,
level specifications) or §1160.30 section 201(rr) of the FD&C Act, the the term ‘‘total tobacco’’ means both the
(manufacturing code). term ‘‘tobacco product’’ means any tobacco filler and any other tobacco or
• Package or packaging: As defined product made or derived from tobacco, tobacco-derived material used as part of
in section 900(13) of the FD&C Act, the or containing nicotine from any source, a tobacco product. This level would be
term ‘‘package’’ means a pack, box, that is intended for human based on the nicotine content of the
carton, or container of any kind or, if no consumption, including any tobacco product, as the means to
other container, any wrapping component, part, or accessory of a regulate nicotine yield in the tobacco
(including cellophane) in which a tobacco product (except for raw smoke or emissions. If a liquid nicotine
tobacco product is offered for sale, sold, materials other than tobacco used in product or other tobacco product
or otherwise distributed to consumers. manufacturing a component, part, or (including a tobacco product containing
• Person: As defined in section 201(e) accessory of a tobacco product). The nicotine from any source) is intended or
of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 321(e)), the term ‘‘tobacco product’’ does not mean reasonably expected to alter the nicotine
term ‘‘person’’ includes an individual, an article that is: a drug under section content of any tobacco product covered
partnership, corporation, or association. 201(g)(1); a device under section 201(h); by this proposed rule, such liquid
• Pipe tobacco: FDA proposes to a combination product described in nicotine or other tobacco product would
define the term ‘‘pipe tobacco’’ as any section 503(g) (21 U.S.C. 353(g)); or a be considered a component or part of a
tobacco that, because of its appearance, food under section 201(f) of the FD&C tobacco product covered under the
type, packaging, or labeling, is suitable Act if such article contains no nicotine, rule’s scope and, therefore, would be in
for use and likely to be offered to, or or no more than trace amounts of violation of the rule if the total amount
purchased by, consumers as tobacco to naturally occurring nicotine. of nicotine in the finished tobacco
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00075 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5106 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
product exceeds 0.70 mg of nicotine per (including the static product ID (PD), if Agency also recognizes concerns that it
gram of total tobacco. applicable), product name(s) (including could be costly for certain
As stated previously, the term brand and subbrand and the original manufacturers to test each batch.
‘‘finished tobacco product’’ refers to name described in the premarket Therefore, FDA requests comment,
those products subject to this regulation, application, if different), product including supporting data, regarding
including any components, parts, or category, subcategory, package type, potential alternatives to batch testing
accessories that are regulated as tobacco package quantity, and nicotine source; and sampling to ensure finished tobacco
products and sealed in a final package, (2) Nicotine level of each sample product compliance with proposed
except for components, parts, or tested from the batch and standard §1160.10 that would reduce costs for
accessories not made or derived from deviation; manufacturers.
tobacco. For cigarettes, cigarette (3) The batch manufacturing date and
3. Analytical Test Method (Proposed
tobacco, and RYO tobacco, all of which location, including facility name and
§1160.14)
were covered under Congress’s original address, for each sample;
grant of authority (section 901(b) of the (4) The testing date and location, Proposed §1160.14 would require
FD&C Act), all components, parts, and including the facility name and address; that tobacco product manufacturers use
accessories of such products would be (5) The manufacturing code of each an analytical test method and
covered under this proposed product sample tested (in accordance with demonstrate that the test method was
standard and subject to the proposed proposed §1160.30(c)); validated in an analytical test
maximum nicotine level. Accessories of (6) The test method and sampling laboratory.
deemed tobacco products (i.e., procedure used; Validation means a process of
accessories for cigars, pipe tobacco) (7) Names and qualifications of the demonstrating or confirming that the
would not be covered. FDA intends to person(s) conducting the testing and any analytical test method is suitable and
use its premarket review authority laboratory accreditation; reliable for its intended purpose.
under sections 905 and 910 of the FD&C (8) The manufacturing and testing Validation of an analytical method
Act to ensure that manufacturers do not equipment used (including applies to a specific laboratory, for a
reengineer their products in a way that documentation to show that the specific product, and equipment
would circumvent the proposed equipment is appropriate for its performing the analytical test method
maximum nicotine level. intended purpose and has been for an intended use over a reasonable
calibrated to ensure accurate and period. Although there are various
2. Product Testing (Proposed §1160.12) reliable results); and approaches to demonstrate that an
Proposed §1160.12 contains (9) The criteria used to make a analytical test method is validated (e.g.,
provisions for the testing of finished decision to accept or reject each batch ICH Guideline Validation of Analytical
tobacco products that would be subject and the decision made with respect to Procedures: Text and Methodology Q2),
to this proposed rule. Specifically, each batch (e.g., accept, reject) based on FDA intends to use the approach
proposed §1160.12(a) would require the results of the product testing. This outlined in the draft guidance entitled
that tobacco product manufacturers information would constitute the ‘‘Validation and Verification of
conduct testing on each batch of documentation of the source data and Analytical Testing Methods Used for
finished tobacco products to ensure that actual results of the product testing Tobacco Products’’ to determine if a
the batch conforms with proposed conducted on each batch. submitted test method is fit-for-purpose.
§1160.10. Under this provision, the The main purpose of this report In March 2024, FDA published a final
manufacturer of the finished tobacco would be to verify that products subject guidance for industry entitled ‘‘Q2(R2)
product would be required to use an to this proposed product standard do Validation of Analytical Procedures’’
analytical test method that meets the not exceed the maximum nicotine level and although it is not specific to tobacco
requirements set forth in proposed and to document the company’s products, FDA’s approach under that
§1160.14. FDA recommends decision for each batch with respect to guidance to determine if a method is fit-
manufacturers use one of three acceptance, rejection, and reworking of for-purpose is applicable for use under
analytical test methods described in the products. FDA expects that this tobacco product standard.40
section VII.D of this document (i.e., information collected pursuant to As described in section VII.D of this
FDA’s Tobacco Products Laboratory proposed §1160.16(b) would be document, FDA recommends
method, CRM No. 62, or CRM No. 87). integrated into the proposed manufacturers use one of three publicly
This section also states that samples for §1160.12(b) records (i.e., proposed available analytical test methods—
such testing would need to be selected §1160.16(b) records would be the basis FDA’s Tobacco Products Laboratory
in accordance with proposed §1160.16. for documenting background method, CRM No. 62, or CRM No. 87—
Proposed §1160.12(b) would require information about the product being to demonstrate compliance with this
that a full report of the source data and tested, including, for example, the proposed product standard. Each of
results of all batch testing be maintained product category and subcategory, brand these analytical test methods includes
by the tobacco product manufacturer in and subbrand, packaging information, the proposed nicotine level in the range
accordance with proposed §1160.32. nicotine source, manufacturing date, of levels that can be accurately
These reports would be generated for and the manufacturing code). These measured.
test samples from each batch and would proposed §1160.12(b) records also
not be required for each individual would document the ultimate 40FDA has announced the availability of a draft
finished tobacco product. This report disposition of the batch based on the guidance for industry entitled ‘‘Validation and
Verification of Analytical Testing Methods Used for
would have to include the following testing of the representative samples.
Tobacco Products’’ (86 FR 72603, December 22,
information: Section III.C of this document describes 2021; see https://www.fda.gov/media/155033/
(1) Full identification of the finished FDA’s rulemaking and inspection download). The draft guidance, when finalized,
tobacco product that is the subject of the authorities related to these records. would represent FDA’s current thinking on method
report, including, if applicable, the While the proposed batch testing and validation for tobacco products. FDA final guidance
‘‘Q2(R2) Validation of Analytical Procedures’’ is
submission tracking number (STN) sampling requirements would provide
available at https://www.fda.gov/media/161201/
associated with marketing authorization FDA with critical information, the download.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00076 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5107
It is reasonable to expect some nonconforming tobacco product With regard to the variability of the
manufacturers may prefer to use other investigations). For example, a tobacco product, confidence intervals,
test methods. If they are developed and manufacturer that has a high number of level of necessary precision, and
validated, such methods may have nonconforming tobacco product number of finished tobacco products
different advantages in ease of use, investigations or a high number of batch sampled must be based on adequate
upper and lower bounds of detection, rejections may decide to create a more statistical criteria. This provides
equipment, and expertise. Thus, under robust sampling plan because of its manufacturers flexibility to determine
this proposal we would evaluate history of producing nonconforming the appropriate number of
analytical test methods and data as part tobacco products. representative samples for any sampling
of a manufacturer’s premarket The basic principles of an adequate plan. While FDA is proposing this
submission in accordance with section sampling plan include the following: flexibility, this provision would require
910 of the FD&C Act. the samples are representative of the that manufacturers have the support for
4. Sampling Plans and Procedures batch or quantity being sampled; the the scientific technique or methods used
(Proposed §1160.16) number of samples is based on a valid to establish the representative samples
scientific rationale; and the number of used and to show that the sampling size
Proposed §1160.16 would require samples is sufficient for the intended is representative of the material being
each tobacco product manufacturer to purpose. ‘‘Valid scientific rationale’’ sampled. The manufacturer must
design and implement a sampling plan refers to scientific techniques or maintain a nicotine content level no
that covers each finished tobacco methods used to establish the number of greater than 0.70 mg nicotine per gram
product that it manufactures. This representative samples and should take of total tobacco for any products within
sampling plan must be based on a valid the batch.
into account tolerance for variability,
statistical rationale to ensure that the Proposed §1160.16(b) would require
confidence levels, and the degree of
finished tobacco product complies with that test samples from each batch be
precision required (Refs. 654 to 656).
proposed §1160.10. This sampling plan collected and examined in accordance
FDA believes that requiring the number
would be used in conjunction with the with certain procedures. These
of samples to be based on a ‘‘valid
analytical test method in proposed procedures are consistent with ISO
scientific rationale’’ would provide
§1160.14 and would provide 8243, an international standard that
manufacturers with the flexibility to
procedures for the manufacturer to specifies two methods of providing
determine the appropriate number of
select samples to demonstrate representative samples of a population
representative samples for any sampling
conformance to the proposed maximum of cigarettes manufactured for sale.
plan. While FDA is proposing this
nicotine level requirement. Under proposed §1160.16(b)(1), test
flexibility, this provision would require
The required procedures are intended samples would have to consist of the
that manufacturers have support for the
to help ensure that tobacco products finished tobacco product as it is
scientific technique or methods used to
containing more than the maximum intended to be sold or distributed to
establish the number of representative
nicotine level are not sold or distributed consumers and not of a separate
samples used and to show that the
to consumers. Manufacturers would be production sample.
sampling size is representative of the
required to ensure that all finished Proposed §1160.16(b)(2) would
tobacco products comply with the material being sampled. FDA requests require that all test samples be stored
requirements of this proposed product comment, including supporting data, according to the intended storage
standard. Products that do not conform regarding whether a final rule should conditions for the finished tobacco
to this standard would be deemed provide a more detailed definition of or product. In addition, the manufacturer
adulterated under section 902(5) of the criteria for what constitutes ‘‘valid would have to include all of its
FD&C Act and subject to enforcement scientific rationale’’ (such as factories, stock rooms, warehouses, and
action. representative sampling) with regard to other locations containing finished
Proposed §1160.16(a) provides the an adequate sampling plan. tobacco products among the population
general requirements for sampling Proposed §1160.16(a) also would to be sampled. Because a batch may
plans. The proposed provision would require that the sampling plan describe include product that is in the warehouse
require manufacturers to design and the sampling methodology (including and product that is in the factory, or in
implement a sampling plan or plans for scientific rationale), incorporate all a place between the warehouse and
each finished tobacco product based on sources of variability (including factory, this requirement would ensure
a valid scientific rationale to ensure that variability of the analytic method and that the sample is representative of the
the product consistently conforms to the nicotine levels), and describe the entire population (batch) of finished
requirements set forth in §1160.10. This sample size needed (including a full tobacco products packaged for
provision also explains that the description of how the sample size is consumer use. This practice is
sampling plan must ensure that samples calculated) consistent with the sampling consistent with the ISO 8243 standard
taken are representative of an entire plan to achieve the sampling objective. (for sampling nicotine) and ensures that
batch (i.e., randomized or systematically The sampling plan must also describe the samples are representative of the
selected across the entire batch) and the criteria the manufacturer would use population of finished tobacco products
collected from each batch for testing. To to make a decision to accept or reject packaged for consumer use.
account for the variability of nicotine in each batch. FDA proposes to give Under proposed §1160.16(b)(3), the
finished tobacco products, the following tobacco product manufacturers manufacturer would have to take test
factors must be based on adequate flexibility to determine what unit of samples from each batch within 30
statistical criteria: the confidence time or quantity is appropriate for their calendar days of the date the product is
intervals, the level of necessary product and how batches would be manufactured. Based on FDA’s
precision, and the number of finished designated. For example, manufacturers experience, any protracted time between
products sampled. The sampling plan likely would define a batch for cigarette manufacturing and testing will add
must take into account the production, which is almost continuous, uncertainty in the accuracy of reported
manufacturing quality history of the differently than a batch for machine or results. Thus, we are proposing a 30
manufacturer (e.g., batch testing records, hand-rolled cigars. calendar day timeframe from the
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00077 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5108 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
manufacture date for the manufacturer Proposed §1160.16(b)(6) provides taken from a batch. The primary
to take test samples from each batch. packaging requirements for when purpose of this information, along with
The amount of material acquired during samples are sent for testing. Test the information required by proposed
sampling must be sufficient to complete samples would have to be packed §1160.16(b)(5), would be to establish
all testing required by proposed securely with adequate protection the chain of custody for the samples
§1160.14, including any repeat testing against damage that might occur, from the time they were taken through
that may be necessary. The sample including mechanical damage or their transfer to the testing facility
materials would have to be selected adverse changes in humidity or where they will be tested. FDA expects
from each batch in accordance with the temperature. The manufacturer also that this information would be
applicable sampling plan. This would would have to send, under separate integrated into the records required by
ensure that there has not been any cover, a list of the samples included in proposed §1160.12(b) to provide
degradation or change in part of the each shipment to the testing facility. information across the batch.
samples. These samples should be identified by Proposed §1160.16(b)(9) explains that
Proposed §1160.16(b)(4) would the relevant information required by each batch must be withheld from
require that sampling be performed by proposed §1160.16(b)(5). commercial distribution until it has
persons who have sufficient education, Proposed §1160.16(b)(7) would been sampled and tested, and a decision
training, and experience to accomplish require that all samples from a single has been made by the tobacco product
their assigned functions. batch be tested at the same testing manufacturer that the batch conforms to
Under proposed §1160.16(b)(5), each facility. This requirement is designed to the requirements of this part and may be
test sample would need to be identified ensure consistency in the procedures released for commercial distribution. As
so that the following information can be used and to protect against sample discussed in proposed §1160.18, the
determined: degradation. manufacturer would be required to
• Full identification of the finished Proposed §1160.16(b)(8) provides reject any nonconforming tobacco
tobacco product sampled, including, if sampling requirements for the testing products unless a disposition decision
applicable, the STN associated with facility. If samples will be transported to and justification to release the batch is
marketing authorization (including the a different facility from the made after an investigation determines
PD, if applicable), product name(s) manufacturing facility for testing, once that the batch meets the requirements of
(including brand and subbrand and the test samples arrive at the testing facility, this part.
samples must be inspected, accounted
original name described in the As noted in the discussion of
for, and properly stored under the
premarket application, if different), proposed §§1160.12 and 1160.16, the
finished tobacco product’s intended
product category, subcategory, package reporting requirements in proposed
storage conditions. The facility also
type, package quantity, and nicotine §§1160.12(b), 1160.16(b)(5), and
would be responsible for generating a
source; 1160.16(b)(8) are interrelated but
• The manufacturing code; report for the batch test, maintained by intended for different purposes.
• The date on which the sample was the manufacturer in accordance with Because this tobacco product standard
§1160.32, which includes the
taken; defines the amount of nicotine relative
• The sampling location (including information in proposed to the amount of total tobacco,
§1160.16(b)(8)(i) through (vi):
the address of the facility and specific manufacturers may be able to base
• Full identification of the finished
location within the facility where the sampling plans on batch sizes based on
tobacco product sampled, including, if
sample was taken); the tobacco filler. For example,
• The name of the person(s) who applicable, the STN associated with cigarettes of two different lengths made
marketing authorization (including the
collected the sample; and from the same tobacco filler blend may
• The location where the sample will PD, if applicable), product name(s) be able to be considered a single batch
(including brand and subbrand and the
be tested (including the facility name for the purposes of calculating the
original name described in the
and address). sampling plan under proposed
premarket application, if different),
This information would be generated §1160.16. Testing for nonconforming
product category, subcategory, package
at the time the samples are pulled for tobacco product under proposed
type, package quantity; and nicotine
testing and for each sample pulled, §1160.16 would require the
source;
rather than reflecting aggregate • The manufacturing code; manufacturer to adequately sample from
information for all the samples in a • The date on which the samples the entire batch in proportion to
particular batch. The purpose of this production. For example, if two-thirds
were taken, if available;
information is to fully identify each • The sampling location (including of the batch is produced as cigarette
sample, including what the product is, the address and specific locations length A and one-third as cigarette
when and where it was taken, and the within any facilities where the samples length B, then two-thirds of the samples
batch from which it was taken. These were taken); for testing for conformance would have
records would serve dual purposes. • The number of test samples drawn to be sampled from cigarette length A
First, they could be used to verify that from the batch; and and one-third from cigarette length B.
a company is following its sampling • Complete records of the samples Manufacturers that purchase bulk
plan and the required procedures in the received and tested, including the date tobacco filler can utilize results of filler
codified including number of samples of receipt, the identifier of all persons testing by the seller in designing and
pulled, when they are pulled, and who tested the samples, and the test implementing their sampling plan.
locations from where they are pulled. results. Reliance on the seller’s filler testing
Second, these records would be used to This information would be generated would not relieve the manufacturer of
generate some of the information for the once the test samples arrive at the the finished tobacco product from its
records required under proposed testing facility. Unlike the information responsibility to test finished tobacco
§1160.16(b)(8). They also would required under proposed products or from responsibility for
document the start of the chain of §1160.16(b)(5), this report would be an complying with this proposed product
custody for the samples. aggregate report for all the samples standard.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00078 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5109
5. Nonconforming Tobacco Product would need to remain segregated product and, as applicable, the locations
(Proposed §1160.18) throughout investigation and where the nonconforming products have
disposition, including any rework. For been distributed. We expect the
Proposed §1160.18 would require
purposes of proposed part 1160, manufacturer would be able to
finished tobacco product manufacturers
‘‘segregation’’ means setting the determine the locations of initial
to establish procedures for the control
identified potential nonconforming consignees (e.g., wholesalers,
and disposition of nonconforming
product apart from other product (i.e., distributors, retailers) where the affected
tobacco products. A ‘‘nonconforming
placing it away from conforming products were shipped in the event a
tobacco product’’ is proposed to be
finished product). This segregation corrective action needs to be taken. The
defined as any tobacco product that
could be accomplished by placing it in investigation would have to include an
does not meet the requirements of
a quarantined or specifically marked-off examination of all relevant processes
§1160.10 (nicotine level specifications)
area. Manufacturers should use and controls, laboratory testing,
or §1160.30 (manufacturing code).
prudence and segregate potential complaints, and any other relevant
These procedures are necessary to help
nonconforming tobacco product in a records and sources of information
prevent the distribution of
manner that is appropriate, given the concerning the nonconforming product.
nonconforming tobacco products by
nature of the potential nonconformity. For example, a manufacturer could
ensuring that all potential
The requirements to identify and determine the extent of the
nonconforming products are identified,
segregate would be triggered upon nonconformity by examining records
investigated, and segregated, and that
discovery of a potential nonconforming and in-process control records for any
appropriate disposition and followup
product. For example, if a tobacco batches, or portions of batches, that
are taken for products determined to be
product manufacturer tests samples of have been rejected during either in-
nonconforming. These provisions are
finished tobacco product and process or finished inspection for failing
also intended to help manufacturers
determines that the representative to meet any or all of the product’s
determine the extent of any
samples from that batch do not conform specifications. Furthermore, in the event
nonconformity and, in cases in which
to the requirement set forth in proposed that a similar nonconforming product is
nonconforming product has already
§1160.10, the manufacturer would identified in a different batch, a
been released for distribution,
determine that the batch and related manufacturer’s investigation could
determine where it was distributed.
products must be identified and include any applicable information and
Proposed §1160.18 would require
segregated as they may be records from the previous
tobacco product manufacturers to
nonconforming products. nonconforming product investigation
establish and maintain procedures to
Proposed §1160.18(b) would require that are relevant to determining the
identify, investigate, segregate, and
tobacco product manufacturers to extent of the nonconformity of the
make disposition decisions (i.e.,
investigate all potential nonconforming affected batch.
acceptance, rejection, rework) about tobacco products. This may include, for Proposed §1160.18(b) would also
nonconforming tobacco products to example if: require that, for products determined to
prevent their release for commercial • The nicotine level of a test sample be nonconforming, the investigation
distribution. ‘‘Establish and maintain’’ from any batch of finished tobacco must also determine the scope and
for purposes of proposed §1160.18 products is determined to be out of cause of nonconformance. Examination
means define, document (in writing or conformance with the requirements of of relevant production processes and
electronically), implement, follow, and, proposed §1160.10; controls and any other relevant records
when necessary, update. This section • FDA notifies the manufacturer that and sources of information could help a
allows manufacturers the flexibility to a finished tobacco product in manufacturer determine if any other
determine how they would perform commercial distribution does not batches are affected or if nonconforming
these activities. conform to the requirements of part product has been distributed. For
Proposed §1160.18(a) would require 1160; or example, if a manufacturer’s sampling
tobacco product manufacturers to • The manufacturer has come to plan and subsequent repeat testing
identify and segregate potential know through any other means that a under proposed §1160.18 determines
nonconforming tobacco product to product is nonconforming. that a batch of finished cigarettes fail to
prevent the commercial distribution of In this context, a test sample would meet the established nicotine level
such products prior to investigation and consist of a number of individual test specification and acceptance criteria,
disposition. Identification of potential units that are drawn based on a valid the manufacturer will have to
nonconforming product can be scientific rationale (such as investigate the scope and cause of the
accomplished in many ways (e.g., representative sampling) and intended nonconformance under this proposed
applying a label with the relevant to ensure that the sample accurately section. If the investigation determines
information directly to the product reflects the material being sampled. The that the cause of the nonconformance is
container; if an electronic system is purpose of a nonconforming product attributed to cut filler received from its
utilized, associating the nonconforming investigation would be to determine the supplier that contain nicotine levels that
product information with the relevant extent and the cause, if possible, of the exceed the maximum nicotine level
barcode). Identification is a critical first nonconformity so that additional established by the proposed product
step to preventing further processing, nonconforming products are not standard, the manufacturer must also
production, or distribution of potential produced or released for commercial determine the scope of the
nonconforming tobacco products. distribution. In addition, it would help nonconformance, such as all batches of
Proposed §1160.18(a) also would to prevent recurrence of the finished cigarettes that used the affected
require potential nonconforming nonconformity. cut filler.
tobacco product to remain segregated Under proposed §1160.18(b), the The manufacturer would have to
pending an investigation until it is manufacturer would be required to document any investigation, including
determined to be conforming. If a conduct an investigation to determine any material review, name of the
potential nonconforming product is the extent of the nonconformity upon person(s) making the disposition
determined to be nonconforming, it identification of a nonconforming decisions, justification for the
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00079 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5110 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
disposition decisions, results of that the nicotine levels were a nonconforming tobacco product
retesting, decisions with respect to erroneously high due to a malfunction investigation and any corrective actions
reworking, and followup results from of the testing equipment, the to be taken by a manufacturer as a result
the investigation (e.g., corrective manufacturer could determine that the of the investigation. The ‘‘-NS’’
actions). FDA may inspect these records batch is acceptable for release for designation will enable retailers to
to verify that the manufacturer has commercial distribution. readily identify that a finished tobacco
performed an adequate investigation. Proposed §1160.18(d) would require product conforms with this standard.
For example, if a manufacturer uses a manufacturers to determine the Finished tobacco products that do not
laboratory to perform product testing disposition of all nonconforming have this designation do not conform to
under proposed §1160.12, and there is tobacco products and any necessary this standard. The manufacturing code
an out-of-specification (OOS) laboratory followup. Under proposed §1160.18(d), information also would aid FDA in
test result, the manufacturer would need nonconforming product cannot be ensuring compliance with this proposed
to investigate the OOS test result under released for distribution without rework product standard by clearly identifying
proposed §1160.18(b) to determine or an adequate justification (developed those products that conform to the
whether the product is nonconforming and maintained in accordance with standard and linking those products to
or the OOS result is due to another §1160.32). Thus, nonconforming records that substantiate their
cause, such as laboratory error. Under product could be reworked, distributed conformance.
proposed §1160.18(b), the investigation with an adequate justification, or As stated in proposed §1160.30(a),
would be required to include an discarded. Additionally, nonconforming the manufacturing code would be
examination of relevant processes, product could be exported if it meets required to be permanently affixed to
operations, and any other relevant the requirements of section 801(e)(1) of the packaging or label of all finished
sources of information such as the the FD&C Act. Proposed §1160.18(d) tobacco products. The manufacturing
laboratory method and review of initial also would require the manufacturer to code must be affixed in a manner that
testing and calibration of the laboratory develop an adequate written ensures it will remain on the packaging
equipment. Such an investigation could justification before releasing such or label through the expected duration
determine that the OOS test results product for commercial distribution. An of use of the product by the consumer.
came from an aberration of the adequate written justification would be In addition, proposed §1160.30(b)
measurement process (e.g., laboratory required to address how the would require that the manufacturing
error, defective testing equipment, nonconforming product meets all code be permanently affixed, legible,
deviation from an established laboratory requirements under this part. conspicuous, prominent, and appear in
test method) and that the potential Nonconforming product cannot be the English language.
nonconforming tobacco product is not released for commercial distribution As stated in proposed §1160.30(c),
nonconforming. Alternatively, an without rework or an adequate written the manufacturing code must contain
investigation could conclude that the justification supporting its release. An the following information listed in the
OOS test result was valid, and that the example of reworking a nonconforming following order:
product was nonconforming as a result • The manufacturing date in 2-digit
product would be a manufacturer
of, for example, the manufacturing numerical values in the month-day-year
reblending the cut filler and retesting to
process. If the manufacturer’s format (MMDDYY);
ensure that it conforms to the
nonconforming product investigation • The finished tobacco product batch
established product standard.
determines that the OOS result is due to number; and
Proposed §1160.18(e) would require
a legitimate reason such as a testing • The designation ‘‘-NS’’ at the end41
each tobacco product manufacturer to
aberration, e.g., instrument malfunction, (to signify that the product was
maintain records of all activities
and the re-test or rework establishes that manufactured in accordance with this
required under §1160.18. Records must
the finished tobacco product conforms nicotine product standard).
include the date and time of the activity,
to the nicotine level of the product FDA requests comment on the
the individual performing the activity,
standard, such product could be manufacturing code requirements in
the type of activity performed, any
released for commercial distribution. this proposed rule.
information that demonstrates the
Proposed §1160.18(c) would require
requirement was met, and any data or 2. Recordkeeping Requirements
tobacco product manufacturers to reject
calculations necessary to reconstruct the (Proposed §1160.32)
a batch of a finished tobacco product if
the nicotine level of the test sample results. Proposed §1160.32 contains
does not meet the requirements of C. Manufacturing Code and recordkeeping requirements. This
§1160.10, unless a disposition decision Recordkeeping Requirements (Proposed information is necessary for FDA to
and justification to release the batch is Subpart C) ascertain and confirm that finished
made after an investigation shows the tobacco products are in compliance
batch meets the requirements of part 1. Manufacturing Code Requirements with the proposed product standard.
1160. This might occur in the event of (Proposed §1160.30) First, proposed §1160.32(a) would
a laboratory or sampling error. Proposed §1160.30 would require require that each facility that
Manufacturers would not be able to that the packaging of all finished manufactures tobacco products subject
simply resample a batch until the batch tobacco products include a to this part (i.e., cigarettes and certain
conforms with the proposed maximum manufacturing code. The manufacturing other finished tobacco products)
nicotine level in §1160.10 if previous code would allow manufacturers and establish and maintain records related
test samples did not the meet the FDA to identify the production batch of to compliance with this part, including
requirements of part 1160. If the initial a particular finished product that has the following:
test samples of the batch were not in been released for distribution. This
conformance, the manufacturer must information is intended to help 41The ‘‘-NS’’ designation will enable retailers to
conduct a nonconforming tobacco determine the product’s history (e.g., readily identify that a finished tobacco product
conforms with this standard. Finished tobacco
product investigation. If the batch production records) and assist
products that do not have this designation do not
manufacturer, for instance, determines manufacturers and FDA in the event of conform to this standard.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00080 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5111
(1) The source data and results of made available within 24 hours or, if cigarette tobacco, RYO tobacco, cigars,
analyses conducted to determine that is not feasible, as soon as possible and pipe tobacco) that does not comply
conformance with §1160.10, including before the close of the inspection. While with the requirements of the final rule,
all information identified in the Agency expects that most records irrespective of the date of manufacture.
§1160.12(b); can be made available to FDA within 24 Prior to the effective date of any final
(2) All source data used to validate an hours, FDA recognizes that, in some rule that may issue based on this
analytical test method; cases, additional time may be needed to proposed rule, wholesalers, retailers,
(3) All sampling plans and sampling retrieve records from a third party or and related entities would be able to sell
reports under §1160.16; archival storage. Records that can be available stock of finished tobacco
(4) Documentation that the persons immediately retrieved from another products that are not in compliance
performing sampling under §1160.16 location, including by computer or other with part 1160 while transitioning
have sufficient education, training, and electronic means, would meet the inventory in anticipation of the effective
experience to accomplish the assigned requirement that the records be readily date of the final rule; however, they
functions; and available. would not be permitted to sell off such
(5) All nonconforming tobacco Proposed §1160.32(c) would require stock after the effective date. FDA notes
product identification, segregation, that the records kept under this part be that keeping products subject to this
investigation, rework, and disposition retained for at least 4 years from the proposed rule with higher nicotine
decision procedures, including date of commercial distribution of the levels on the market for an extended
justifications under §1160.18. finished tobacco product that is the period of time is not in the interest of
This information is necessary for FDA
subject of the record. FDA has selected public health.
to ascertain and confirm that the 4 years to help ensure that the records The Nicotine ANPRM requested
products are in compliance with the would be available for at least one comment on a proposed effective date
proposed product standard. biennial FDA inspection under sections for a nicotine tobacco product standard.
Second, proposed §1160.32(b)
704 and 905(g) of the FD&C Act. Several comments recommended that
provides certain specifications for these
FDA believes that detailed FDA establish a 1-year timeframe for
records. All records required under this
recordkeeping requirements are implementation. Other comments urged
part, regardless of storage medium,
necessary to confirm that finished FDA to set a 2-year timeframe for
would need to be attributable (i.e.,
tobacco products are in compliance implementation, which they stated
traceable to its source), legible (i.e., in a
with the proposed product standard. For would be the minimum required by
readable format), contemporaneously
example, requiring manufacturers to section 907 of the FD&C Act due to the
recorded (i.e., recorded at the time of
document their test results would impact on farmers. A few comments
performance), original (i.e., first capture
enable FDA to confirm that the argued that an implementation period
of the data), and accurate (i.e., correct,
manufacturer’s analytical test method is should be required for all
truthful, complete, valid, and reliable).
adequate to meet the requirements of manufacturers, regardless of the number
In addition, these records would be
part 1160. In addition, requiring of employees and/or annual revenues,
required to be written in English; nonconforming tobacco product records because the long time to develop the
alternatively, an accurate English would help the manufacturer and FDA regulation plus the implementation
translation must be made available upon determine the extent of the period would be sufficient warning for
request. Documents that have been nonconformity with the product all companies. However, many
translated from a foreign language into standard and, as applicable, the comments argued that the
English would have to be accompanied implementation period should be
locations where the nonconforming
by the foreign language version of the significantly longer than a 1- or 2-year
products have been distributed, for
document and a certification by the period to allow farmers, tobacco
example, in the event of a recall.
manufacturer’s authorized intermediaries, and manufacturers to
representative (which could be a U.S. XI. Proposed Effective Date develop and implement the methods of
agent for the manufacturer) that the In accordance with section 907(d)(2) reduction.
English language translation is complete of the FD&C Act,42FDA proposes that The comments differed as to whether
and accurate, and a brief statement of any final rule that may issue based on FDA should allow manufacturers any
the qualifications of the person who this proposal become effective 2 years time to sell off nonconforming tobacco
made the translation (e.g., education, after the date of publication of the final product. Several comments urged FDA
experience). These records would need rule. Therefore, after the effective date, to allow manufacturer sell-off of existing
to be maintained at the manufacturing nonconforming inventory, with some
no manufacturer or importer would be
establishment or another location that is stating that a 6-month or 12-month
allowed to distribute, sell, or offer for
readily accessible to responsible selloff period should be sufficient for
distribution or sale within the United
officials of the manufacturer and to nonconforming product to move
States any finished tobacco product that
FDA. These records, including those not through the supply chain. Nevertheless,
does not comply with proposed part
stored at the establishment, would need several comments opposed provisions
1160. After the effective date of the final
to be readily accessible to FDA during that would allow sell-off of existing
rule, manufacturers and importers
the retention period (as discussed in inventory, arguing that the extensive
would not be allowed to enter or
§1160.32(c)) for inspection and period of the development of the
introduce into domestic commerce any
photocopying or other means of standard combined with a 2-year phase-
finished tobacco product (i.e., cigarettes,
reproduction. Original or true copies of in period would give the companies
these records that can be immediately more than enough time to sell-off or
42Section 907(d)(2) of the FD&C Act states that
retrieved from another location, a regulation establishing a tobacco product standard recall existing inventory. Some
including by computer or other shall set forth the date or dates upon which the comments stated that a 60-day selloff
electronic means, would satisfy the standard shall take effect, but no such regulation period would be a sufficient selloff
requirements of this section. may take effect before 1 year after the date of its period while still maintaining the
publication unless the Secretary determines that an
FDA expects that requested records public health goals of the standard. FDA
earlier effective date is necessary for the protection
that are maintained offsite would be of the public health. requests comments, including
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00081 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5112 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
supportive data and research, regarding in the United States, and nearly all of by people who currently smoke
a selloff period (e.g., 60 days after the the adverse health effects are ultimately cigarettes.
effective date of the final rule) for the result of addiction to the nicotine in Pursuant to section 907(d)(2), FDA
retailers to sell through their current cigarettes and certain other combusted requests comments by interested parties,
inventory of nonconforming product. tobacco products, which leads to including manufacturers and tobacco
FDA considered many factors in repeated exposure to toxicants from growers, regarding the technical
determining an appropriate proposed these products. Given the tremendous achievability of compliance with this
effective date. Pursuant to section public health risks presented— proposed product standard, including
907(d)(2) of the FD&C Act, FDA
particularly to youth who experiment information concerning the existence of
considered the technical achievability of
with these products, develop an patents that make it impossible to
compliance with the proposed product
addiction to nicotine, and progress to comply in the proposed 2-year
standard and the existence of patents
regular use—by combusted tobacco timeframe. FDA also requests comment
that would make it impossible to
products, FDA finds that any balancing on the timeframe for manufacturers to
comply in the proposed 2-year
of impacts to domestic and international prepare applications and obtain
timeframe. For example, for
trade is far outweighed by the marketing authorization from FDA for
manufacturers that may not want to use
significant public health benefits of this their new tobacco products. Further,
chemical extraction, FDA considered
proposed product standard for all age FDA requests comments and data
how long it would likely take for a
groups. FDA also believes that a 2-year regarding whether 2 years is sufficient
tobacco product manufacturer to acquire
effective date would allow adequate to comply with this standard or whether
sufficient VLNC tobacco to meet the
time for implementing any necessary this effective date should be later to
proposed product standard. Industry
changes in technology to achieve the provide additional time for
documents indicate that the timing of
availability of leaf once commercial proposed nicotine level, for making any manufacturers to develop any necessary
seed is provided is one growing season changes to tobacco purchasing choices changes in technology, facilities,
(Ref. 657). Seed production and and curing methods, and for preparation farming methods, or other factors or
germination testing can be conducted in or changes needed in facilities, which business practices affecting compliance.
multiple seasons within a single year can be accomplished simultaneously. In FDA also requests comments and
with small-scale trial to commercial addition, this timeframe should provide supporting data as to whether a shorter
availability taking place over the course adequate time for manufacturers to seek effective date would be necessary for the
of 1 year (Ref. 658). For example, and obtain marketing authorization from protection of the public health.
industry documents indicate that a FDA for their new tobacco products. XII. Preliminary Economic Analysis of
request for purchase of low alkaloid FDA believes that this 2-year period Impacts
nicotine in March 1990 would be would provide sufficient time for a
expected to result in leaf delivery tobacco product manufacturer to A. Introduction
during August and September (Ref. submit, and FDA to review, applications
We have examined the impacts of the
657). for new tobacco products that comply
proposed rule under Executive Order
Once purchased, FDA considered with this provision. This is particularly
12866, Executive Order 13563,
how long tobacco must be stored prior true given our expectation that most
Executive Order 14094, the Regulatory
to use in cigarettes and other combusted manufacturers that reduce the nicotine
Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601–612), and
tobacco products. Industry documents levels of their products to comply with
the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of
suggest a minimum storage age the proposed standard would be
1995 (Pub. L. 104–4).
(particularly for burley and flue-cured submitting SE Reports, which may
tobaccos) of around 12 months (Refs. decrease the amount of data required for Executive Orders 12866, 13563, and
659 to 663). Other tobacco authorization. See section IX.B of this 14094 direct us to assess all benefits,
manufacturers suggest that tobaccos document regarding pathways to market costs, and transfers of available
should be stored for 22 months, tobacco products that have been regulatory alternatives and, when
although other studies suggest that aging modified to meet the proposed standard. regulation is necessary, to select
beyond 12 months has minimal effects FDA requests comments, including regulatory approaches that maximize
(Refs. 662 and 664). Industry documents net benefits (including potential
supportive data and research, on the
also indicate that processed tobaccos do economic, environmental, public health
timeframe for manufacturers to prepare
not appear to require long-term and safety, and other advantages;
applications and obtain marketing
inventory or aging in the same manner distributive impacts; and equity). Rules
authorization from FDA for their new
as whole-leaf tobaccos (Ref. 659). FDA are ‘‘significant’’ under Executive Order
tobacco products.
requests comments, including 12866 Section 3(f)(1) (as amended by
supportive data and research, on the FDA finds this proposed effective date Executive Order 14094) if they ‘‘have an
technical achievability of compliance to be appropriate for the protection of annual effect on the economy of $200
with the proposed product standard and the public health, given that current million or more (adjusted every 3 years
the existence of patents that would nicotine levels in the finished tobacco by the Administrator of [the Office of
make it impossible to comply in the products cause addiction and repeated Information and Regulatory Affairs
proposed 2-year timeframe. exposure to toxicants, which ultimately (OIRA)] for changes in gross domestic
FDA also finds that a 2-year effective result in the majority of tobacco-related product); or adversely affect in a
date will ‘‘minimize, consistent with the disease and death in the United States. material way the economy, a sector of
public health, economic loss to, and Additional delay, past 2 years, would the economy, productivity, competition,
disruption or dislocation of, domestic only increase the number of youth and jobs, the environment, public health or
and international trade’’ pursuant to young adults who transition to regular safety, or State, local, territorial, or tribal
section 907(d)(2) of the FD&C Act. As use of cigarettes and certain other governments or communities.’’ OIRA
discussed extensively throughout this combusted tobacco products and would has determined that this proposed rule
document, tobacco use is the leading delay switching to potentially less is a significant regulatory action under
cause of preventable disease and death harmful tobacco products or cessation Executive Order 12866 Section 3(f)(1).
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00082 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5113
The Regulatory Flexibility Act opinion to estimate the impact of model output on prevalence to estimate
requires us to analyze regulatory options changes in tobacco product initiation, the baseline and policy market size.
that would minimize any significant cessation, switching, and dual use on These estimates feed into cost estimates,
impact of a rule on small entities. tobacco use prevalence, morbidity, and such as lost producer surplus. Producers
Because businesses, including small mortality in the United States. We use of combusted tobacco products incur a
businesses, would incur costs to comply output from this population health primary annualized producer surplus
with the proposed product standard, we model to estimate averted mortality and loss of $1.7 billion (low-impact scenario
find that the proposed rule will have a preliminarily apply the value of a of $0.2 billion and a high-impact
significant economic impact on a statistical life while requesting feedback scenario of $2 billion) at a 2 percent
substantial number of small entities. about how to follow HHS guidance (see discount rate. We expect that some
The Unfunded Mandates Reform Act PRIA Section II.M.6). The morbidity manufacturers would reformulate their
of 1995 (section 202(a)) requires us to estimates come from population health products to comply with this standard.
prepare a written statement, which model output that evaluates the health We estimate a one-time reformulation
includes an assessment of anticipated difference for being in the state of cost with present value of $0.6 billion
costs and benefits, before proposing smoking verse not smoking. (low-impact scenario estimate of $8.8
‘‘any rule that includes any Federal Unquantified benefits include medical billion to a high-impact scenario
mandate that may result in the cost savings, productivity loss savings, estimate of $0.04 billion). Manufacturers
expenditure by State, local, and tribal reduced exposure to thirdhand smoke, that reformulate would collectively
governments, in the aggregate, or by the and environmental impacts. We incur a one-time cost to submit their
private sector, of $100,000,000 or more estimate that the present value of the new tobacco product for FDA review,
(adjusted annually for inflation) in any quantified benefits over a 40-year time estimated at a present value $1 million
one year.’’ The 2023 threshold after horizon ranges between $7.6 trillion and at a 2 percent discount rate (low-impact
adjustment for inflation is $183 million, $33.2 trillion with a primary estimate of scenario estimate of $15 million to a
using the 2023 Implicit Price Deflator $30.6 trillion at a 2 percent discount high-impact scenario estimate of $0.1
for the Gross Domestic Product. This rate. The primary annualized million). In addition, these
proposed rule would result in an quantifiable benefits equal $1.1 trillion manufacturers would also incur
expenditure in at least 1 year that meets at a 2 percent discount rate. recurring costs to test the nicotine level
or exceeds this amount. As most of the benefits from avoided of their products with a primary
B. Summary of Costs and Benefits initiation among youth and young annualized estimate of $0.3 million
adults due to this proposed product (low-impact scenario estimate of $1.9
We have developed a comprehensive standard are expected to fall outside of million to a high-impact scenario
Preliminary Economic Analysis of the 40-year time horizon of the main estimate of $0.1 million) at a 2 percent
Impacts that assesses the impacts of the analysis, we present an extended discount rate. We estimate a one-time
proposed rule. The full preliminary analysis over a period beyond the 40- cost for FDA to review submissions for
analysis of economic impacts is year time horizon to capture the impact new tobacco products at a present value
available in the docket for this proposed on youth and young adults. The present of $1.0 million at a 2 percent discount
rule (Ref. 653) and at https:// rate (low-impact scenario estimate of
value of quantified benefits, mostly
www.fda.gov/about-fda/economics- $15.3 million to a high-impact scenario
attributable to youth and young adults,
staff/regulatory-impact-analyses-ria. estimate of $0.1 million). The economy
over this extended period range between
The summary of costs, benefits, and faces a one-time economic transition
$8.4 trillion and $19.7 trillion with a
transfers is presented in table 13. cost with a present value of $7.2 billion
primary estimate of $19.1 trillion at a 2
Benefits occur because the proposed at a 2 percent discount rate (low-impact
percent discount rate. Additionally, we
rule would discourage people who do scenario estimate of $4.3 billion to a
present the incidence of benefits for
not use tobacco products from initiating high-impact scenario estimate of $9.1
specific populations in the
combusted tobacco products and billion) to reallocate productive
Distributional Effects section.
progressing to regular use and increase resources (such as labor and capital)
We expect this proposed rule, if
cessation or switching to potentially currently devoted to the manufacture of
finalized, to impose costs on industry to
lower risk tobacco products among NNC covered combusted tobacco
follow the product standard, on the
people who currently use covered products to other tobacco products or to
broader economy to repurpose land,
combusted tobacco products and wish non-tobacco products. We estimate
labor, and capital, on consumers
to quit. Lower prevalence of combusted transition cost based on average
impacted by the product standard, and
tobacco product use would lead to industry capital expenditures and
on FDA to enforce this product
reduced health consequences for people literature on the cost of labor transition.
standard. The tobacco market faces a
who formerly used combusted tobacco Consumers of NNC covered combusted
one-time primary cost with a present
products and those who were tobacco products would face a one-time
value of $374 million at a 2 percent
previously exposed to secondhand search cost with a present value of $1.4
discount rate (low-impact scenario
smoke. The main quantified benefits billion at a 2 percent discount rate (low-
estimate of $112 million to a high-
come from averted mortality and impact scenario estimate of $0.46 billion
impact scenario estimate of $700
morbidity as a result of reduced to a high-impact scenario estimate of
million) to read and understand the
prevalence for people who currently use $2.8 billion) to find other tobacco
combusted tobacco products, and rule.43We also use population health products or NRT as a replacement for
reduced mortality from reduced the prohibited NNC products. We
exposure to secondhand smoke among 43For the purposes of our analysis, we use the estimate one-time withdrawal costs for
population health model described in section VIII.A
people. As described in section VIII.A of this document to estimate impacts for a range of
above, to assess the potential public averted mortality and tobacco prevalence. The post-policy combusted tobacco prevalence. For
health impacts of a nicotine product ‘‘high impact scenario’’, generally referred to as the some costs (product reformulation, premarket
standard, FDA developed a population upper bound, corresponds to the scenario where the submission, and review, and testing costs), the
policy has 95th percentile averted mortality ‘‘upper bound’’ corresponds to the scenario with
health model using inputs derived from
projected by the population health model, which the fewest products and, thus, would reflect the
available empirical evidence and expert also corresponds with the lowest (5th percentile) lowest estimate of costs.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00083 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5114 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
consumers who quit tobacco products, billion to a high-impact scenario of percent discount rate. The primary
with a primary estimate of $1.4 billion $76.2 billion) at a 2 percent discount estimate for the annualized transfers
at a 2 percent discount rate (low-impact rate. The primary estimates for the from State governments, in the form of
scenario estimate of $0.02 billion to a annualized costs are $2.1 billion at a 2 reduced excise tax, ranges from $2.8
high-impact scenario estimate of $8.99 percent discount rate. billion to $8.9 billion, with a primary
billion), at a 2 percent discount rate. We In addition to benefits and costs, this estimate of $8.4 billion at a 2 percent
estimate additional costs associated rule would cause transfers from the discount rate. The primary estimate for
with FDA enforcement of the product Federal Government, State governments, the annualized transfers from the firms,
standard to range from an annualized and firms to consumers, who in turn in the form of reduced revenue, is $20.0
value of $3.3 million to $7 million at a would spend this money in other billion at a 2 percent discount rate (low-
2 percent discount rate. Unquantified sectors of the economy (including impact scenario of $6.2 billion; high-
costs may include changes in consumer savings), in the form of reduced revenue impact scenario of $17.6 billion). The
surplus for some people who smoke and tax revenue. We also estimate primary estimate for the annualized user
NNC products, including potential transfers between or within firms to fee obligation shifted from combusted
utility changes for consumers who cover shifts in user fee obligation. The tobacco products to noncombusted
switch from NNC to VLNC combusted primary estimate for the annualized tobacco products has a range from $26.3
tobacco products. The present value of transfers from the Federal Government, million to $461.1 million with a primary
the costs over a 40-year time horizon in the form of reduced excise tax, ranges estimate of $332.6 million at a 2 percent
has a primary estimate of $58 billion from $1.4 billion to $4.3 billion, with a discount rate. Transfers are summarized
(low-impact scenario estimate of $19.3 primary estimate of $4.1 billion at a 2 in table 13.
TABLE 13—SUMMARY OF BENEFITS, COSTS, AND DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSED RULE
[Millions of 2023 dollars over a 40-year time horizon]
Discount
Primary Low High Dollar
Category rate Time horizon Notes
estimate estimate estimate year
(%)
Benefits
Annualized monetized benefits ................... $1,097,053 $273,521 $1,190,582 2023 2 2025–2064 (40 years) See footnote.44
Annualized quantified, but non-monetized, .................... .................... .................... .................... ................
benefits.
Unquantified benefits .................................. Medical cost savings, productivity loss savings, reductions in smoking-related fires (excluding mortality), reduced litter,
and other associated harms to the environment
Costs
Annualized monetized costs ....................... 2,077 690 2,729 2023 2 2025–2064 (40 years).
Annualized quantified, but non-monetized, .................... .................... .................... .................... ................
costs.
Unquantified costs....................................... Changes in consumer surplus for some people who smoke normal nicotine content combusted tobacco products,
including potential utility changes for consumers who switch from NNC to VLNC combusted tobacco products.
Transfers
Annualized monetized Federal budgetary 4,092 1,386 4,313 2023 2 2025–2064 (40 years).
transfers.
Bearers of transfer gain and loss? ............. Transfers of Excise Tax Revenues from Federal Governments to Consumers
Annualized monetized State budgetary 8,414 2,848 8,877 2023 2 2025–2064 (40 years).
transfers.
Bearers of transfer gain and loss? ............. Transfers of Excise Tax Revenues from State Governments to Consumers
Other annualized monetized transfers........ 19,964 6,235 17,603 2023 2 2025–2064 (40 years).
Bearers of transfer gain and loss? ............. Transfers of Revenues from Tobacco Firms to Consumers
Other annualized monetized transfers........ 333 26 461 2023 2 2025–2064 (40 years).
Bearers of transfer gain and loss? ............. Transfers from User Fees Owed by Combusted Tobacco Firms to s Owed by Noncombusted Tobacco Firms
Net benefits
Annualized monetized net benefits............. 1,094,976 272,831 1,187,853 2023 2 2025–2064 (40 years).
Category Effects Notes
Effects on State, local, or Tribal govern- Significant transfer of tax revenues for State governments. Potential transfer of tax revenue for
ments. local and Tribal governments.
Effects on small businesses ....................... Significant revenue reductions and compliance costs for small, combusted tobacco product
manufacturers. We expect most small, combusted manufacturers would shut down or switch
industries.
Effects on wages......................................... No significant wage impacts.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00084 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd
I I I I I I
I I I I I I
I I I I I I
I I I I I I
I I I I IFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5115
TABLE 13—SUMMARY OF BENEFITS, COSTS, AND DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSED RULE—Continued
[Millions of 2023 dollars over a 40-year time horizon]
Discount
Primary Low High Dollar
Category rate Time horizon Notes
estimate estimate estimate year (%)
Category Effects Notes
Effects on growth ........................................ Anticipated growth in the noncombusted tobacco sector.
We request comment on our estimates with an estimate of the annual Subpart B contains the proposed
of benefits, costs, and transfers of this reporting, recordkeeping, and third- product standard requirements
proposed rule. party disclosure burden. Included in the pertaining to finished tobacco products
estimate is the time for reviewing that cover product testing (§1160.12),
XIII. Analysis of Environmental Impact
instructions, searching existing data sampling plans (§1160.16), analytical
The Agency has carefully considered sources, gathering and maintaining the test methods (§1160.14),
the potential environmental effects of data needed, and completing and nonconforming tobacco products
this action. FDA has concluded that the reviewing each collection of (§1160.18), package label requirements
action will not have a significant impact information. If finalized, this proposed (§1160.30) and recordkeeping
on the human environment, and that an rule will seek approval of a new requirements (§1160.32).
environmental impact statement is not information collection. Subpart C contains manufacturing
required. The Agency’s finding of no FDA invites comments on these code (§1160.14) and recordkeeping
significant impact and the evidence topics: (1) whether the proposed (§1160.32) requirements.
supporting that finding is available in collection of information is necessary Proposed §1160.12 contains
the docket for this proposed rule (Refs. for the proper performance of FDA’s provisions for the testing of finished
665 and 666) and may be seen in functions, including whether the tobacco products that would be subject
Dockets Management Staff (see information will have practical utility; to this proposed rule. Specifically,
ADDRESSES) between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., (2) the accuracy of FDA’s estimate of the proposed §1160.12(a) would require
Monday through Friday; it is also burden of the proposed collection of that tobacco product manufacturers
available electronically at https:// information, including the validity of conduct testing on each batch of
www.regulations.gov. Under FDA’s the methodology and assumptions used; finished tobacco products.
regulations implementing the National Proposed §1160.12(b) would require
(3) ways to enhance the quality, utility,
Environmental Policy Act (21 CFR part that a full report of the source data and
and clarity of the information to be
25), an action of this type would require results of all batch testing be maintained
collected; (4) ways to minimize the
an environmental assessment under 21 by the tobacco product manufacturer.
burden of the collection of information
CFR 25.20. Based on FDA subject matter expertise
on respondents, including through the
and experience from tobacco
XIV. Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 use of automated collection techniques,
inspections, we expect that
when appropriate, and other forms of
This proposed rule contains
manufacturers would discuss in these
information technology; and (5) the
information collection provisions that
reports how their product is batched.
standard and customary business
are subject to review by the Office of
These reports would be generated for
practices of tobacco manufacturers as it
Management and Budget (OMB) under
test samples from each batch and would
relates to capital, operating, and
the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995
not be required for each individual
maintenance costs associated with this
(44 U.S.C. 3501–3521). A description of
finished tobacco product. This report
collection of information.
these provisions is given in the
would have to include the following
Description section of this document Title: Tobacco Product Standard for
information:
Nicotine Yield of Cigarettes and Certain
(1) Full identification of the finished
Other Combusted Tobacco Products
44FDA notes that these results hinge on an expert tobacco product that is the subject of the
elicitation in which the experts were provided peer (0910–NEW).
report, including the product category,
reviewed literature on VLNC and NNC cigarette use Description: The FD&C Act authorizes
in experiments. The expert elicitation and much of subcategory, product name (brand and
FDA to adopt tobacco product
the literature specifically referenced the nicotine subbrand), package type, package
level of 0.4 mg nicotine per gram total tobacco. standards, including product standards quantity, and nicotine source;
However, in 22nd Century Group, Inc.’s modified that include provisions for nicotine
(2) Nicotine level of each sample
risk tobacco product applications, the company yields and for the reduction or
reported that after 9 years of sampling by the tested from the batch and standard
elimination of other constituents
company, the average nicotine content of its deviation;
genetically engineered VLNC tobacco is 0.6 mg (including smoke constituents) or (3) The batch manufacturing date and
nicotine per gram of total tobacco, with a range of harmful components (section location, including facility name and
0.4 to 0.7 mg nicotine per gram of total tobacco. It 907(a)(3)(A) and (4) of the FD&C Act).
address, for each sample;
is likely that the Quest and SPECTRUM Nicotine
Research Cigarettes, used throughout the scientific FDA is proposing to limit nicotine yield (4) The testing date and location,
literature, also contained between 0.4 to 0.7 mg by setting a maximum nicotine content including the facility name and address;
nicotine per gram of total tobacco (Ref. 257). This level for finished cigarettes and certain (5) The manufacturing code of each
suggests the literature the experts reviewed studied other finished combusted tobacco sample tested (in accordance with
cigarettes in the range of 0.4–0.7 mg nicotine per
gram total tobacco as opposed to only 0.4 mg products not to exceed 0.70 mg of proposed §1160.30(c));
nicotine per gram total tobacco. Therefore, the nicotine per gram of total tobacco. (6) The test method and sampling
results of the expert elicitation are still applicable Subpart A contains the general procedure used;
to a nicotine level of 0.7 mg nicotine per gram total provisions of this proposed product (7) Names and qualifications of the
tobacco. For reference, nicotine content in the top
standard including scope, prohibited person(s) conducting the testing and any
100 cigarette brands (2017) is 17.2 mg nicotine per
gram total tobacco (Ref. 9). activities, and definitions. laboratory accreditation;
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00085 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd
I I I I I5116 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
(8) The equipment used (including certain procedures (proposed product and, as applicable, the locations
documentation to show that the §1160.16(b)). Each test sample would where the nonconforming products have
equipment is appropriate for its need to be identified so that the been distributed. We expect the
intended purpose and has been following information can be manufacturer would be able to
calibrated to ensure accurate and determined: determine the locations of initial
reliable results); and • Full identification of the finished consignees (e.g., wholesalers,
(9) The criteria used to make a tobacco product sampled, including distributors, retailers) where the affected
decision to accept or reject each batch product category, subcategory, product products were shipped in the event a
and the decision made with respect to name (brand and subbrand), package corrective action needs to be taken. The
each batch (e.g., accept, reject) based on type, package quantity, and nicotine investigation would have to include an
the results of the product testing. This source; examination of all relevant processes
information would constitute the • The manufacturing code; and controls, laboratory testing,
documentation of the source data and • The date on which the sample was complaints, and any other relevant
actual results of the product testing taken; records and sources of information
conducted on each batch. • The sampling location (including concerning the nonconforming product.
The main purpose of this report the address of the facility and specific Tobacco product manufacturers would
would be to verify that products subject location within the facility where the be required to reject a batch of a
to this proposed product standard do sample was taken); finished tobacco product if the nicotine
not exceed the maximum nicotine level • The name of the person(s) who level of the test sample does not meet
and to document the company’s collected the sample; and the requirements unless a disposition
decision for each batch with respect to • The location where the sample will decision and justification to release the
acceptance, rejection, and reworking of be tested (including the facility name batch is made after an investigation
the products. FDA expects that and address). shows the batch meets the requirements.
information collected pursuant to Proposed §1160.18 would require Tobacco product manufacturers
proposed §1160.12(b) would be finished tobacco product manufacturers would be required to determine the
integrated with the proposed to establish procedures for the control disposition of all nonconforming
§1160.18(b) records (i.e., proposed and disposition of nonconforming tobacco products and any necessary
§1160.12(b) records regarding the tobacco products. The proposed followup. Nonconforming product
product being tested, including, for procedures would require tobacco cannot be released for commercial
example, the product category and product manufacturers to establish and distribution without rework or an
subcategory, brand and subbrand, maintain procedures to identify, adequate justification (developed and
packaging information, nicotine source, investigate, segregate, and make maintained in accordance with
manufacturing date, and the disposition decisions (i.e., acceptance, §1160.32). Thus, nonconforming
manufacturing code would inform the rejection, rework) about nonconforming product could be reworked, distributed
1160.18(b) investigation). These finished tobacco products to prevent with an adequate justification, or
proposed §1160.12(b) records also their release for commercial discarded. An adequate written
would document the ultimate distribution. FDA interprets ‘‘establish justification would be required to
disposition of the batch based on the and maintain’’ for purposes of proposed address how the nonconforming
testing of the representative samples. §1160.18 to mean define, document (in product meets all requirements under
Proposed §1160.14 would require writing or electronically), implement, this part.
that manufacturers analyze the nicotine follow, and, when necessary, update. Proposed §1160.18(e) would require
levels of cigarettes and certain other Identification of potential each tobacco product manufacturer to
finished combusted tobacco products nonconforming product (i.e., a tobacco maintain records of all activities
covered by the rule using a validated product that does not conform to the required under §1160.18. Records must
analytical test method. Manufacturers proposed maximum nicotine level include the date and time of the activity,
would be required to demonstrate that requirement) can be accomplished in the individual performing the activity,
the test method used was validated in many ways (e.g., applying a label with the type of activity performed, any
an analytical test laboratory. Proposed the relevant information directly to the information that demonstrates the
§1160.16 would require each tobacco product container; if an electronic requirement was met, and any data or
product manufacturer to design and system is utilized, associating the calculations necessary to reconstruct the
implement a sampling plan that covers nonconforming product information results.
each finished tobacco product that it with the relevant barcode). If a potential FDA expects that information
manufactures. This sampling plan nonconforming product is determined collected pursuant to proposed
would provide procedures for the to be nonconforming, it would need to §1160.12(b) would be integrated with
manufacturer to select samples to remain segregated throughout the proposed §1160.18(b) records (i.e.,
demonstrate conformance to the investigation and disposition, including proposed §1160.12(b) records regarding
proposed maximum nicotine level any rework. For purposes of proposed the product being tested, including, for
requirement. The required procedures part 1160, ‘‘segregation’’ means setting example, the product category and
would help ensure that products that the identified potential nonconforming subcategory, brand and subbrand,
exceed the maximum level of nicotine product apart from other product (i.e., packaging information, nicotine source,
are not sold or distributed to consumers. placing it away from conforming manufacturing date, and the
This provision also explains that the finished product). This segregation manufacturing code would inform the
sampling plan must ensure samples could be accomplished by placing it in 1160.18(b) investigation). These
taken are representative of an entire a quarantined or specifically marked-off proposed §1160.12(b) records also
batch and are randomly selected and area. would document the ultimate
collected from each batch for testing. The manufacturer would be required disposition of the batch based on the
This section would also require test to conduct an investigation to determine testing of the representative samples.
samples from each batch be collected the extent of the nonconformity upon Proposed §1160.30 would require the
and examined in accordance with identification of a nonconforming use of a manufacturing code to serve as
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00086 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5117
a common identifier for production and manufactures tobacco products subject necessary to confirm that finished
distribution records. The purpose of the to this part (i.e., finished tobacco tobacco products are in compliance
manufacturing code is to allow products) establish and maintain with the proposed product standard. For
manufacturers and FDA to identify the records related to compliance with this example, requiring manufacturers to
production batch of a particular finished part, including the following: document their test results would
product that has been released for (1) The source data and results of enable FDA to confirm the
distribution. This information is analyses conducted to determine manufacturer’s test method is adequate
intended to help determine the conformance with §1160.10, including to meet the requirements of part 1160.
product’s history (e.g., batch production all information identified in In addition, requiring nonconforming
records) and assist manufacturers and §1160.12(b); product records would help the
FDA in the event of a nonconforming (2) All source data used for analytical manufacturer and FDA determine the
product investigation and any corrective test method validation;
extent of the nonconformity with the
actions to be taken as a result of the (3) All sampling plans and sampling
product standard and, as applicable, the
investigation. reports under §1160.16;
locations where the nonconforming
The manufacturing code would be (4) Documentation that the persons
required to be permanently affixed to performing sampling under §1160.16 products have been distributed; for
the packaging or labeling of all finished have sufficient education, training, and example, in the event of a recall.
tobacco products. The manufacturing experience to accomplish the assigned Description of Respondents: The
code must be affixed in a manner that functions; and information collection requirements in
ensures it will remain on the packaging (5) All nonconforming tobacco the proposed standard would apply to
or label through the expected duration product identification, segregation, tobacco product manufacturers, which
of use of the product by the consumer. investigation, rework, and disposition means any person, including a repacker
In addition, proposed §1160.30(b) decision procedures, including or relabeler, who (1) manufactures,
would require that the manufacturing justifications, under §1160.18. This fabricates, assembles, processes, or
information is necessary for FDA to
code be permanently affixed, legible, labels a tobacco product; or (2) imports
ascertain and confirm that the products
conspicuous, prominent, and appear in a finished tobacco product for sale or
are in compliance with the proposed
the English language. distribution in the United States.
As stated in proposed §1160.30(c), product standard. Specifically, the information collection
Second, proposed §1160.32(b)
the manufacturing code must contain would apply to manufacturers of
provides certain specifications for these
the following information listed in the cigarettes (other than noncombusted
records. All records required under this
following order: cigarettes, such as heated tobacco
• The manufacturing date in 2-digit part, regardless of storage medium, products that meet the definition of a
numerical values in the month-day-year would need to be attributable, legible, cigarette), cigarette tobacco, roll-your-
format (MMDDYY); contemporaneously recorded, original, own (RYO) tobacco, cigars (including
• The finished tobacco product batch and accurate. In addition, these records
little cigars, cigarillos, and large cigars,
number; and would be required to be written in
but excluding ‘‘premium cigars’’), and
• The designation ‘‘-NS’’ at the end. English; alternatively, an accurate
pipe tobacco (other than waterpipe
The manufacturing code would allow English translation must be made
tobacco). FDA recognizes that many of
manufacturers and FDA to identify the available upon request. Documents that
the proposed provisions of the proposed
production batch of a particular finished have been translated from a foreign
rule are in accordance with the quality
product that has been released for language into English would have to be
control and manufacturing practices
distribution. This information is accompanied by the foreign language
that manufacturers have already
intended to help determine the version of the document and a
adopted on a voluntary basis.
product’s history (e.g., batch production certification by the manufacturer’s
Application requirements are set by the
records) and assist manufacturers and authorized representative (which could
final Substantial Equivalence (0910–
FDA in the event of a nonconforming be a U.S. agent for the manufacturer)
0673) and Premarket Tobacco Product
product investigation and any corrective that the English language translation is
Application (0910–0879) rules. For
actions to be taken as a result of the complete and accurate, and a brief
products covered by this proposed
investigation. statement of the qualifications of the
Proposed §1160.32 contains person who made the translation (e.g., standard, we expect most manufacturers
recordkeeping requirements that are education, experience). These records will seek authorization using the
necessary for FDA to ascertain and would need to be maintained at the substantial equivalence premarket
confirm that finished tobacco products manufacturing establishment or another pathway, which may decrease the
are in compliance with the proposed location that is readily accessible to amount of data required for
product standard. The proposed product responsible officials of the manufacturer authorization. See section IX.B of this
standard would require that and to FDA. document regarding pathways to market
manufacturers establish and maintain Proposed §1160.32(c) would require tobacco products that have been
records regarding the results of testing that the records kept under this part be modified to meet the proposed standard.
conducted on each batch to determine retained for at least 4 years from the Based on FDA’s subject matter expertise
conformance with the proposed date of commercial distribution of the and industry data, we recognize that
standard. In addition, this proposed finished tobacco product that is the between 85 and 90 percent of all
product standard would require that subject of the record. FDA has selected cigarette production is conducted by
manufacturers maintain records of batch 4 years as a means to help ensure that large manufacturers. We also find that
testing, source data for analytical test the records would be available for at the other tobacco product categories,
method validation, sampling plans and least one biennial FDA inspection under such as non-premium cigars, pipe, and
sampling procedures, and sections 704 and 905(g) of the FD&C RYO tobacco, have similar levels of
nonconforming tobacco products. Act. market concentration. We assume that
First, proposed §1160.32(a) would FDA believes that detailed large tobacco product manufacturers
require that each facility that recordkeeping requirements are represent the bulk of tobacco product
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00087 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5118 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
production capacity and so represent information. Manufacturers are already already check for consistency and
the majority of recordkeeping burden. required to submit test results of conformance of their products and
The proposed provision §1160.12 analytical testing for nicotine and other rework product as necessary to supply
(batch testing), is part of standard and relevant harmful and potentially information for internal quality checks
customary business practices of tobacco harmful constituents (HPHCs) as part of and distribution purposes, we do not
manufacturers. As such, there are no premarket submissions. As the anticipate capital, operating, or
capital costs or operating and establishment and use of analytical maintenance cost from these provisions.
maintenance costs associated with this testing is already generally required for
The proposed provision §1160.30
collection of information. Batch testing premarket submissions, we do not
(manufacturing code labeling), is part of
is conducted either by the manufacturer anticipate capital, operating, or
standard and customary business
in-house or by a 3rd-party accredited maintenance cost from these provisions.
practices of tobacco manufacturers. As
laboratory. If sent to a 3rd-party The proposed provision §1160.16
such, there are no capital costs or
laboratory, we do not expect any capital, (sampling plans), is part of standard and
operating and maintenance costs
operating, or maintenance costs customary business practices of tobacco
associated with this collection of
associated with batch testing to be manufacturers. As such, there are no
information. Based on FDA subject
incurred by the manufacturer. We capital costs or operating and
matter expertise and industry
expect a manufacturer would only test maintenance costs associated with this
information, we find that almost all
their products in-house if they already collection of information. Manufacturers
manufacturers already apply a
possess an in-house laboratory already routinely conduct analytical
manufacturing code to their products.
accredited to conduct scientific tests. testing to check for consistency in their
Because a manufacturing code also
We would not anticipate capital, finished products. To conduct such
supplies information that the
operating, or maintenance costs for testing, manufacturers would have
manufacturer needs for internal quality
these in-house laboratories as capital needed to establish a sampling plan to
and distribution purposes (standard and
and maintenance are components of generate a representative sample of their
customary practices), we do not
maintaining accreditation. We do not product for testing. As such, we do not
anticipate additional capital, operating,
expect any manufacturers currently anticipate capital, operating, or
or maintenance cost from these
without an in-house laboratory to newly maintenance cost from these provisions.
provisions.
establish an in-house accredited The proposed provision §1160.18
laboratory as a result of this product (nonconforming tobacco products), is FDA specifically invites comments on
standard. part of standard and customary business our discussion of the standard and
The proposed provision §1160.14 practices of tobacco manufacturers. As customary business practices of tobacco
(analytical test method), is also part of such, there are no capital costs or manufacturers as it relates to capital,
standard and customary business operating and maintenance costs operating, and maintenance costs
practices of tobacco manufacturers. As associated with this collection of associated with this collection of
such, there are no capital costs or information. Based on FDA subject information.
operating and maintenance costs matter expertise and inspections, we FDA estimates the burden of this
associated with this collection of find that almost all manufacturers collection of information as follows:
TABLE 14—ESTIMATED ANNUAL RECORDKEEPING BURDEN45
Number of Average
Number of Total annual
21 CFR section or activity records per burden per Total hours
recordkeepers records
recordkeeper recordkeeping
§1160.12 Product Testing ......................................... 143 50.84 7,270 9 65,430
§1160.14 Analytical Test Method.............................. 143 4 572 1 572
§1160.16 Sampling Plan ........................................... 143 4 572 1 572
§1160.18 Procedures for Nonconforming Tobacco
Products and Related Investigations; Procedures
for Control and Disposition of Nonconforming To-
bacco Products....................................................... 143 1 143 14 2,002
§1160.30 Package Label Requirements (Manufac-
turing Code)............................................................ 143 4 572 7 4,004
§1160.32 Recordkeeping Requirements (Batch
Testing Records) .................................................... 143 50.84 7,270 6 43,620
Total Annual Burden ........................................... .......................... .......................... .......................... .......................... 116,200
Table 14 displays the recordkeeping and sampling procedures, and records manufacturers of finished tobacco
burden associated with this proposed related to manufacturing controls. products that are distributed or sold in
rule. Included in this estimate is the FDA’s burden estimates are based on the United States. We estimate the
recordkeeping burden for establishing CTP’s Tobacco Registration and Listing number of affected entities, by tobacco
and maintaining records regarding the Module Next Generation (TRLM NG) product category and size of operation
results of testing conducted on each data and Dun & Bradstreet firm data group. We estimate that there are a total
batch to determine conformance with
(D&B). The requirements in the Tobacco of 143 entities potentially affected by
the proposed standard, sampling plans
Product Standard for Nicotine Yield of the proposed rule (domestic
Cigarettes and Certain Other Combusted manufacturers and importers of
45There are no capital costs or operating and
Tobacco Products proposed rule would impacted tobacco products, including
maintenance costs associated with this collection of
information. apply to both domestic and foreign 133 manufacturers and importers of
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00088 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5119
cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, and RYO would determine an analytical test internal quality checks and distribution
tobacco and 10 dual operation facilities method to use for complying with the purposes.
that manufacture both combusted and product standard. During validation of Proposed §1160.30 would require
noncombusted products). For purposes the analytical test method within the manufacturers to apply a manufacturing
of the PRA estimates, FDA used the laboratory to be used, the respondent code to the packaging and label of
entities affected and a weighted average would record and collect the data tobacco products. Based on FDA subject
of the median hours to calculate the generated and maintain these records. matter expertise and market tracking
respondents and total burden hours. FDA estimates there will be 4 records
information, we find that almost all
We estimate a total of 7,270 batches per recordkeeper with 1 hour of average
manufacturers already apply a
per year are required to be tested under burden per recordkeeping and
manufacturing code to their products.
§1160.12 (product testing). Based on respondents will establish a total of 572
FDA assumes 4 records per
information from inspections and other annual records for a total of annual 572
recordkeeper with 7 hours of average
FDA subject matter expertise, including hours. Under §1160.16 (sampling plan),
burden per recordkeeping, and a total of
typical batch sizes and projected FDA estimates there will be 4 records
572 annual records for a total of annual
combusted tobacco production by year, per recordkeeper with 1 hour of average
4,004 hours.
FDA estimates that there will be 50.84 burden per recordkeeping. FDA assumes
Under §1160.32 (batch testing
records per recordkeeper with 9 hours respondents will establish a total of 572
records), FDA assumes 50.84 records
of average burden per recordkeeping. annual records for a total of annual
per recordkeeper with 6 hours of
FDA assumes respondents will establish records for a total of annual 572 hours.
a total of 7,270 annual records for a total Under §1160.18 (procedures for average burden per recordkeeping. This
of annual 65,430 hours. nonconforming products), FDA assumes estimate is based on establishing the
Based on information from there will be 1 record per recordkeeper format and maintaining batch test
inspections and other FDA subject with 14 hours of average burden per records for detailed recordkeeping
matter expertise, we expect that core recordkeeping for a total of 143 annual requirements, including English
blends are the products that records and a total of annual 2,002 translation and accessibility, that are
manufacturers will choose to hours. This estimate is based on necessary to confirm that finished
reformulate to meet the product information from tobacco inspections tobacco products are in compliance
standard. Manufacturers would incur a and FDA experience in developing good with the proposed product standard.
burden to establish an analytical test manufacturing practices in non-tobacco FDA assumes that respondents will
method and sampling plan for each industries. Further, as stated above, maintain a total of 7,270 annual records
reformulated core blend. FDA experts based on FDA subject matter expertise for a total of annual 43,620 hours.
assume that each manufacturer, on and inspections, we find that almost all FDA expects the additional one-time
average, utilizes four different core manufacturers already check for (i.e., occurring only in the first year)
blends per tobacco category that they consistency and conformance of their reporting burden for the information
manufacture. Under §1160.14 products and rework product as collection that will result from this rule,
(analytical test method), respondents necessary to supply information for to be as follows:
TABLE 15—ESTIMATED ONE-TIME REPORTING BURDEN
Number of Average
Number of Total annual
Activity responses per burden per Total hours
respondents responses
respondent response
Review and familiarization with the rule .................... 1,465 1 1,465 10 14,650
Total One-Time Burden ...................................... .......................... .......................... .......................... .......................... 14,650
Based on FDA subject matter received, OMB recommends that written forth in Executive Order 13132. Section
expertise, we assume that all entities comments be submitted through 4(a) of the Executive order requires
affected by this proposed rule would reginfo.gov (see ADDRESSES). All Agencies to ‘‘construe . . . a Federal
spend time to read and understand the comments should be identified with the statute to preempt State law only where
rule, resulting in a one-time reporting title of the information collection. the statute contains an express
burden. FDA estimates that there will be In compliance with the Paperwork preemption provision or there is some
293 entities and 5 individuals at each Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. other clear evidence that the Congress
entity that will read the final rule. It is 3407(d)), we have submitted the intended preemption of State law, or
estimated that each respondent will information collection provisions of this where the exercise of State authority
spend up to 10 hours reading and proposed rule to OMB for review. These conflicts with the exercise of Federal
understanding the rule for a total of information collection requirements authority under the Federal statute.’’ We
14,650 one-time burden hours. Per the will not be effective until FDA have determined that the proposed rule,
requirements of this proposed rule, FDA publishes a final rule, OMB approves if finalized, would not contain policies
estimates the total burden will be the information collection requirements, that have substantial direct effects on
130,850 hours (116,200 + 14,650). and the rule goes into effect. FDA will the States, on the relationship between
FDA invites comments on the announce OMB approval of these the National Government and the States,
estimates in this section and specifically requirements in the Federal Register. or on the distribution of power and
any burden specific to small responsibilities among the various
XV. Federalism
manufacturers to whom this proposed levels of government. Accordingly, the
standard would apply. To ensure that We have analyzed this proposed rule Agency tentatively concludes that the
comments on information collection are in accordance with the principles set rule does not contain policies that have
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00089 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5120 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
federalism implications as defined in of section 916(a)(2)(A) of the FD&C Act forth in Executive Order 13175. We
the Executive order and, consequently, because they are ‘‘requirements under have tentatively determined that the
a federalism summary impact statement the provisions of the chapter relating to rule contains policies that may have a
is not required. tobacco product standards.’’ substantial direct effect on one or more
This rule is being issued under Accordingly, the preemptive effect of Indian Tribes, on the relationship
section 907 of the FD&C Act, which those requirements on any State or local between the Federal Government and
enables FDA to prescribe regulations requirement would be determined by Indian Tribes, or on the distribution of
relating to tobacco product standards, the nature of the State or local power and responsibilities between the
and the sale and distribution restriction requirement at issue—specifically, Federal Government and Indian Tribes.
in this rule is also being issued under whether the State or local requirement We expect some tribal governments to
section 906(d) of the FD&C Act, which is preserved under section 916(a)(1) of be impacted given that some are
enables FDA to prescribe regulations the FD&C Act, and/or excepted under manufacturers and retailers of cigarettes.
restricting the sale and distribution of a section 916(a)(2)(B) of the FD&C Act The Agency solicits comments from
tobacco product. If this proposed rule is (such as if it relates to the ‘‘sale, tribal officials on any potential impact
made final, the final rule would create distribution, possession, information on Indian Tribes from this proposed
requirements whose preemptive effect reporting to the State, exposure to, action.
would be governed by section 916 of the access to, the advertising and promotion
FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 387p) entitled of, or use of, tobacco products’’). State XVIII. References
‘‘Preservation of State and local and local prohibitions on the sale and The following references marked with
authority.’’ distribution of tobacco products would an asterisk (*) are on display at the
Section 916 of the FD&C Act broadly not be preempted by this rule, if Dockets Management Staff (see
preserves the authority of States and finalized, because such prohibitions ADDRESSES) and are available for
localities to protect the public against would be preserved by section 916(a)(1) viewing by interested persons between
the harms of tobacco use. Specifically, of the FD&C Act or, as applicable, 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through
section 916(a)(1) of the FD&C Act excepted from express preemption by Friday; they also are available
establishes a general presumption that section 916(a)(2)(B) of the FD&C Act. electronically at https://
FDA requirements do not preempt or FDA invites comments on how State or www.regulations.gov. References
otherwise limit the authority of States, local laws may be implicated if this without asterisks are not on public
localities, or tribes to, among other proposed rule is finalized. display at https://www.regulations.gov
things, enact and enforce laws regarding because they have copyright restriction.
XVI. Severability
tobacco products that relate to certain Some may be available at the website
activities (e.g., sale, distribution) and In accordance with section 5 of the address, if listed. References without
that are in addition to or more stringent Tobacco Control Act, which provides asterisks are available for viewing only
than requirements established under for the severability of, inter alia, all at the Dockets Management Staff.
chapter IX of the FD&C Act. ‘‘regulations promulgated under’’ the Although FDA verified the website
Section 916(a)(2)(A) of the FD&C Act authorities provided by that Act, FDA
addresses in this document, please note
is an express preemption provision that would consider the various
that websites are subject to change over
establishes an exception to the requirements and prohibitions
time.
preservation of State and local established by this rule, if finalized, to
governmental authority over tobacco be severable. It is FDA’s interpretation * 1. HHS. The Health Consequences of
Smoking—50 Years of Progress. A Report
products established in section and position that the invalidity of any
of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA:
916(a)(1). Specifically, section provision of a final rule would not affect
HHS, CDC, National Center for Chronic
916(a)(2)(A) of the FD&C Act provides the validity of any other part of the rule. Disease Prevention and Health
that ‘‘[n]o State or political subdivision In the event any court or other lawful Promotion, Office on Smoking and
of a State may establish or continue in authority were to temporarily or Health. 2014. Available at https://
effect with respect to a tobacco product permanently invalidate, restrain, enjoin, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
any requirement which is different or suspend any provision of a final rule,
NBK179276/pdf/Bookshelf_
from, or in addition to, any requirement FDA intends for the remaining parts to NBK179276.pdf.
* 2. Brown & Williamson Tobacco
under the provisions of this chapter continue to be valid. Additionally, as
Corporation, and R.B. Griffith. Letter
relating to tobacco product standards further stated in section 5 of the
from RB Griffith to John Kirwan
. . . .’’ Tobacco Control Act, if certain Regarding Neil Gilliam’s Presentation at
However, section 916(a)(2)(B) limits applications of a final rule to persons or Chelwood. British American Tobacco
the applicability of section 916(a)(2)(A) circumstances (discussed in the Records; Master Settlement Agreement,
of the FD&C Act, narrowing the scope of preamble or otherwise) are held to be 1963. Available at https://
State and local requirements that are invalid, application of such provisions www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/
subject to express preemption. to any other person or circumstance will jglw0200.
* 3. Jamal, A., E. Park-Lee, J. Birdsey, et al.
Paragraph (a)(2)(B) provides that not be affected and will continue to be
‘‘Tobacco Product Use among Middle
preemption under paragraph (a)(2)(A) enforced to the fullest extent possible. and High School Students—National
does not apply to State or local Each provision of the rule is Youth Tobacco Survey, United States,
‘‘requirements relating to the sale, independently supported by data and 2024.’’ MMWR Morbidity and Mortality
distribution, possession, information analysis as described or referenced in Weekly Report, 73(41):917–924, 2024.
reporting to the State, exposure to, this preamble and, if issued separately, Available at 10.15585/mmwr.mm7341a2.
access to, the advertising and promotion would remain a proper exercise of FDA * 4. VanFrank, B., A. Malarcher, M.E.
Cornelius, et al. ‘‘Adult Smoking
of, or use of, tobacco products by authority.
Cessation—United States, 2022.’’ MMWR
individuals of any age, or relating to fire
XVII. Consultation and Coordination Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
safety standards for tobacco products.’’
With Indian Tribal Governments 73(29):633–641, 2024. Available at
If this proposed rule is finalized as 10.15585/mmwr.mm7329a1.
proposed, the final rule would create We have analyzed this proposed rule * 5. Hatsukami, D.K., X. Luo, L. Dick, et al.
requirements that fall within the scope in accordance with the principles set ‘‘Reduced Nicotine Content Cigarettes
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00090 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5121
and Use of Alternative Nicotine Available at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol- Changing Patterns of Tobacco Product
Products: Exploratory Trial.’’ Addiction, 2020-055672. Use.’’ Addiction, 116(7):1859–1870,
112(1):156–167, 2017. Available at * 17. HHS. Preventing Tobacco Use among 2021. Available at 10.1111/add.15403.
10.1111/add.13603. Youth and Young Adults: A Report of * 27. Institute of Medicine. Public Health
* 6. FDA. ‘‘Cigarettes.’’ FDA.gov. Accessed the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: HHS, Implications of Raising the Minimum
November 14, 2023. https:// CDC, National Center for Chronic Age of Legal Access to Tobacco Products.
www.fda.gov/tobacco-products/ Disease Prevention and Health In: Bonnie, R.J., K. Stratton, L.Y. Kwan,
products-ingredients-components/ Promotion, Office on Smoking and (Eds.). Public Health Implications of
cigarettes. Health. 2012. Available at https:// Raising the Minimum Age of Legal
* 7. FDA. ‘‘Hookah Tobacco (Shisha or www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/ Access to Tobacco Products. Washington
Waterpipe Tobacco).’’ FDA.gov. NBK99237/. (DC): National Academies Press. 2015.
Accessed November 14, 2023. https:// * 18. HHS. Preventing Tobacco Use among Available at 10.17226/18997.
www.fda.gov/tobacco-products/ Young People: A Report of the Surgeon * 28. HHS. How Tobacco Smoke Causes
products-ingredients-components/ General. Atlanta, GA: HHS, CDC, Disease: The Biology and Behavioral
hookah-tobacco-shisha-or-waterpipe- National Center for Chronic Disease Basis for Smoking-Attributable Disease.
tobacco. Prevention and Health Promotion, Office A Report of the Surgeon General.
* 8. National Academies of Sciences on Smoking and Health. 1994. Available Atlanta, GA: HHS, CDC, National Center
Engineering and Medicine. Public Health at https://www.google.com/books/ for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Consequences of E-Cigarettes. edition/_/DE7u3o0KnzsC?hl=en&sa= Health Promotion, Office on Smoking
Washington, DC: The National X&ved=2ahUKEwj2nLK- and Health. 2010. Available at https://
Academies Press. 2018. Available at 68KHAxXSElkFHTs_ www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
10.17226/24952. COEQre8FegQIERAJ. NBK53017/.
* 9. Carmines, E., and I.E. Gillman. * 19. HHS. Smoking Cessation: A Report of * 29. Donny, E.C., R.L. Denlinger, J.W. Tidey,
‘‘Comparison of the Yield of Very Low the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: HHS, et al. ‘‘Randomized Trial of Reduced-
Nicotine Content Cigarettes to the Top CDC, National Center for Chronic Nicotine Standards for Cigarettes.’’ New
100 United States Brand Styles.’’ Disease Prevention and Health England Journal of Medicine,
Contributions to Tobacco & Nicotine Promotion, Office on Smoking and 373(14):1340–9, 2015. Available at
Research, 28(6):253–266, 2019. Available Health. 2020. Available at https:// 10.1056/NEJMsa1502403.
at 10.2478/cttr-2019-0005. www.hhs.gov/surgeongeneral/reports- 30. Shiffman, S., S.M. Scholl, and J.M. Mao.
10. Shrestha, S.S., R. Ghimire, X. Wang, et al. and-publications/tobacco/2020- ‘‘Very-Low-Nicotine-Content Cigarettes
‘‘Cost of Cigarette Smoking—Attributable cessation-sgr-factsheet-key-findings/ and Dependence among Non-Daily
Productivity Losses, U.S., 2018.’’ index.html. Smokers.’’ Drug and Alcohol
American Journal of Preventive 20. Poorthuis, R.B., N.A. Goriounova, J.J. Dependence, 197:1–7, 2019. Available at
Medicine, 63(4):478–485, 2022. Couey, et al. ‘‘Nicotinic Actions on 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2018.12.021.
Available at 10.1016/ Neuronal Networks for Cognition: 31. Walker, N., T. Fraser, C. Howe, et al.
j.amepre.2022.04.032. General Principles and Long-Term ‘‘Abrupt Nicotine Reduction as an
* 11. Max, W., H.Y. Sung, and Y. Shi. Consequences.’’ Biochemical Endgame Policy: A Randomised Trial.’’
‘‘Deaths from Secondhand Smoke Pharmacology, 78(7):668–76, 2009. Tobacco Control, 24(e4):e251–7, 2015.
Exposure in the United States: Economic Available at 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.04.031. Available at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-
Implications.’’ American Journal of 21. Slovic, P. Cigarette Smokers: Rational 2014–051801.
Public Health, 102(11):2173–80, 2012. Actors or Rational Fools? The Feeling of * 32. Hatsukami, D.K., M. Kotlyar, L.A.
Available at 10.2105/ajph.2012.300805. Risk. 1st Ed. London: Routledge. Hertsgaard, et al. ‘‘Reduced Nicotine
* 12. Carter, B.D., C.C. Abnet, D. Feskanich, 2010:85–108. Available at 10.4324/ Content Cigarettes: Effects on Toxicant
et al. ‘‘Smoking and Mortality—Beyond 9781849776677. Exposure, Dependence and Cessation.’’
Established Causes.’’ New England * 22. Kann, L., T. McManus, W.A. Harris, et Addiction, 105(2):343–55, 2010.
Journal of Medicine, 372(7):631–40, al. ‘‘Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance— Available at 10.1111/j.1360–
2015. Available at 10.1056/ United States, 2015.’’ MMWR 0443.2009.02780.x.
NEJMsa1407211. Surveillance Summaries, 65(6):1–174, * 33. Klemperer, E.M., J.R. Hughes, P.W.
* 13. Babb, S., A. Malarcher, G. Schauer, et 2016. Available at 10.15585/ Callas, et al. ‘‘Effectiveness of Switching
al. ‘‘Quitting Smoking among Adults— mmwr.ss6506a1. to Very Low Nicotine Content Cigarettes
United States, 2000–2015.’’ MMWR * 23. Zhang, L., A. Gentzke, K.F. Trivers, et Plus Nicotine Patch Versus Reducing
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, al. ‘‘Tobacco Cessation Behaviors among Daily Cigarette Consumption Plus
65(52):1457–1464, 2017. Available at U.S. Middle and High School Students, Nicotine Patch to Decrease Dependence:
10.15585/mmwr.mm6552a1. 2020.’’ Journal of Adolescent Health, An Exploratory Randomized Trial.’’
* 14. Me´ndez, D., T.T.T. Le, and K.E. Warner. 70(1):147–154, 2022. Available at Addiction, 114(9):1639–1650, 2019.
‘‘Monitoring the Increase in the U.S. 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.07.011. Available at 10.1111/add.14666.
Smoking Cessation Rate and Its * 24. Apelberg, B.J., C.G. Corey, A.C. 34. Rose, J.E., and F.M. Behm. ‘‘Effects of
Implication for Future Smoking Hoffman, et al. ‘‘Symptoms of Tobacco Low Nicotine Content Cigarettes on
Prevalence.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Dependence among Middle and High Smoke Intake.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco
Research, 24(11):1727–1731, 2022. School Tobacco Users: Results from the Research, 6(2):309–19, 2004. Available at
Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntac115. 2012 National Youth Tobacco Survey.’’ 10.1080/14622200410001676378.
* 15. HHS. The Health Consequences of American Journal of Preventive 35. Rose, J.E., F.M. Behm, E.C. Westman, et
Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke. Medicine, 47(2 Suppl 1):S4–14, 2014. al. ‘‘Precessation Treatment with
A Report of the Surgeon General. Available at 10.1016/ Nicotine Skin Patch Facilitates Smoking
Atlanta, GA: HHS, CDC, Coordinating j.amepre.2014.04.013. Cessation.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco
Center for Health Promotion, National * 25. Gentzke, A.S., T.W. Wang, M. Research, 8(1):89–101, 2006. Available at
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention Cornelius, et al. ‘‘Tobacco Product Use 10.1080/14622200500431866.
and Health Promotion, Office of Smoking and Associated Factors among Middle * 36. Leventhal, A.M., H. Dai, and S.T.
and Health. 2006. Available at https:// and High School Students—National Higgins. ‘‘Smoking Cessation Prevalence
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/ Youth Tobacco Survey, United States, and Inequalities in the United States:
NBK44324/. 2021.’’ MMWR Surveillance Summaries, 2014–2019.’’ Journal of the National
16. Warner, K.E. ‘‘Will 5.6 Million Current 71(5):1–29, 2022. Available at 10.15585/ Cancer Institute, 114(3):381–390, 2022.
American Youth Eventually Die from mmwr.ss7105a1. Available at 10.1093/jnci/djab208.
Smoking? The Anatomy of a Commonly * 26. Jackson, S.E., J. Brown, and M.J. Jarvis. * 37. Chaiton, M., L. Diemert, J.E. Cohen, et
Accepted Tobacco Control Measure.’’ ‘‘Dependence on Nicotine in U.S. High al. ‘‘Estimating the Number of Quit
Tobacco Control, 30:446–448, 2021. School Students in the Context of Attempts It Takes to Quit Smoking
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00091 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5122 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Successfully in a Longitudinal Cohort of * 47. Apelberg, B.J., S.P. Feirman, E. Salazar, 2008. Available at https://www.jstor.org/
Smokers.’’ BMJ Open, 6(6):e011045, et al. ‘‘Potential Public Health Effects of stable/48668191.
2016. Available at 10.1136/bmjopen- Reducing Nicotine Levels in Cigarettes in * 57. HHS. The Health Consequences of
2016–011045. the United States.’’ New England Journal Smoking: Nicotine and Addiction. A
* 38. Caggiula, A.R., E.C. Donny, M.I. of Medicine, 2018. Available at 10.1056/ Report of the Surgeon General.
Palmatier, et al. ‘‘The Role of Nicotine in NEJMsr1714617. Rockville, MS: HHS, Public Health
Smoking: A Dual-Reinforcement Model.’’ * 48. Vugrin, E.D., B.L. Rostron, S.J. Verzi, et Service, CDC, National Center for
Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, al. ‘‘Modeling the Potential Effects of Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
55:91–109, 2009. Available at 10.1007/ New Tobacco Products and Policies: A Promotion, Office on Smoking and
978–0–387–78748–0_6. Dynamic Population Model for Multiple Health. 1988. Available at https://
* 39. World Health Organization. Advisory Product Use and Harm.’’ PloS One, profiles.nlm.nih.gov/spotlight/nn/
Note: Global Nicotine Reduction 10(3):e0121008, 2015. Available at catalog/nlm:nlmuid-101584932X423-
Strategy: WHO Study Group on Tobacco 10.1371/journal.pone.0121008. doc.
Product Regulation. Geneva, * 49. FDA. FDA’s Response to External Peer * 58. Benowitz, N.L. ‘‘Nicotine Addiction.’’
Switzerland: 2015. Available at https:// Review on the Methodological Approach New England Journal of Medicine,
www.who.int/publications/i/item/ to Modeling the Potential Impact of a 362(24):2295–303, 2010. Available at
advisory-note-global-nicotine-reduction- Nicotine Product Standard on Tobacco 10.1056/NEJMra0809890.
strategy-who-study-group-on-tobacco- Use, Morbidity, and Mortality in the U.S. * 59. Dani, J.A., and S. Heinemann.
product-regulation. Silver Spring, MD: HHS, FDA, Center for ‘‘Molecular and Cellular Aspects of
* 40. Benowitz, N.L., S.M. Hall, S. Stewart, Tobacco Products. 2025. Available at Nicotine Abuse.’’ Neuron, 16(5):905–8,
et al. ‘‘Nicotine and Carcinogen Exposure https://www.fda.gov/science-research/ 1996. Available at 10.1016/s0896–
with Smoking of Progressively Reduced peer-review-scientific-information-and- 6273(00)80112–9.
Nicotine Content Cigarette.’’ Cancer assessments/completed-peer-reviews. * 60. Dani, J.A., D. Jenson, J.I. Broussard, et
Epidemiology, Biomarkers and * 50. Institute of Medicine. Ending the al. ‘‘Neurophysiology of Nicotine
Prevention, 16(11):2479–85, 2007. Tobacco Problem: A Blueprint for the Addiction.’’ Journal of Addiction
Available at 10.1158/1055–9965.epi-07– Nation. Washington (DC): National Research and Therapy, S1:001(1), 2011.
0393. Academies Press. 2007. Available at Available at 10.4172/2155–6105.S1–001.
* 41. Hatsukami, D.K., L.A. Hertsgaard, R.I.
https://nap.nationalacademies.org/ * 61. Henningfield, J.E., N.L. Benowitz, J.
Vogel, et al. ‘‘Reduced Nicotine Content
catalog/11795/ending-the-tobacco- Slade, et al. ‘‘Reducing the
Cigarettes and Nicotine Patch.’’ Cancer
problem-a-blueprint-for-the-nation. Addictiveness of Cigarettes. Council on
Epidemiology, Biomarkers and
* 51. Lopez-Quintero, C., J. Pe´rez de los Scientific Affairs, American Medical
Prevention, 22(6):1015–24, 2013.
Cobos, D.S. Hasin, et al. ‘‘Probability and Association.’’ Tobacco Control, 7(3):281–
Available at 10.1158/1055–9965.EPI–12–
Predictors of Transition from First Use to 93, 1998. Available at 10.1136/tc.7.3.281.
1439.
Dependence on Nicotine, Alcohol, * 62. Baker, T.B., N. Breslau, L. Covey, et al.
* 42. FDA. Methodological Approach to
Cannabis, and Cocaine: Results of the ‘‘DSM Criteria for Tobacco Use Disorder
Modeling the Potential Impact of a
National Epidemiologic Survey on and Tobacco Withdrawal: A Critique and
Nicotine Product Standard on Tobacco
Alcohol and Related Conditions Proposed Revisions for DSM–5.’’
Use, Morbidity, and Mortality in the U.S.
(NESARC).’’ Drug and Alcohol Addiction, 107(2):263–75, 2012.
Silver Spring, MD: HHS, FDA, Center for
Dependence, 115(1–2):120–30, 2011. Available at 10.1111/j.1360–
Tobacco Products. 2025. Available at
Available at 10.1016/ 0443.2011.03657.x.
https://www.fda.gov/science-research/
j.drugalcdep.2010.11.004. * 63. HHS. The Health Consequences of
peer-review-scientific-information-and-
52. Huh, J., and D.S. Timberlake. ‘‘Do Smoking: A Report of the Surgeon
assessments/completed-peer-reviews.
Smokers of Specialty and Conventional General. Atlanta, GA: HHS, CDC,
* 43. FDA. ‘‘FDA Announces Comprehensive
Cigarettes Differ in Their Dependence on National Center for Chronic Disease
Regulatory Plan to Shift Trajectory of
Nicotine?’’ Addictive Behaviors, Prevention and Health Promotion, Office
Tobacco-Related Disease, Death.’’
34(2):204–11, 2009. Available at on Smoking and Health. 2004. Available
FDA.gov. July 27, 2017. https://
www.fda.gov/news-events/press- 10.1016/j.addbeh.2008.10.014. at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
announcements/fda-announces- * 53. National Cancer Institute. Cigars: NBK44695/.
comprehensive-regulatory-plan-shift- Health Effects and Trends. Tobacco 64. Donny, E.C., E. Houtsmuller, and M.L.
trajectory-tobacco-related-disease-death. Control Monograph No. 9. NIH Pub. No. Stitzer. ‘‘Smoking in the Absence of
* 44. FDA. Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products 98–4302, Bethesda: MD: HHS, National Nicotine: Behavioral, Subjective and
after Implementation of an FDA Product Institutes of Health, National Cancer Physiological Effects over 11 Days.’’
Standard. Silver Spring, MD: HHS, FDA, Institute. 1998. Available at http:// Addiction, 102(2):324–334, 2007.
Center for Tobacco Products. 2018. cancercontrol.cancer.gov/tcrb/ Available at 10.1111/j.1360–
Available at https://www.fda.gov/files/ monographs/9/m9_complete.PDF. 0443.2006.01670.x.
tobacco%20products/published/Illicit- * 54. McDonald, L.J., R.S. Bhatia, and P.D. 65. Walker, J.F., and P.D. Loprinzi.
Trade-in-Tobacco-Products-After- Hollett. ‘‘Deposition of Cigar Smoke ‘‘Longitudinal Examination of Predictors
Implementation-of-an-FDA-Product- Particles in the Lung: Evaluation with of Smoking Cessation in a National
Standard.pdf. Ventilation Scan Using 99mTc-Labeled Sample of U.S. Adolescent and Young
* 45. FDA. The Science of a Nicotine Sulfur Colloid Particles.’’ Journal of Adult Smokers.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco
Standard for Combusted Tobacco Nuclear Medicine, 43(12):1591–5, 2002. Research, 16(6):820–7, 2014. Available at
Products. Silver Spring, MD: HHS, FDA, Available at https://jnm. 10.1093/ntr/ntu005.
Center for Tobacco Products. 2025. snmjournals.org/content/jnumed/43/12/ 66. Benowitz, N.L. ‘‘Drug Therapy.
Available at https://www.fda.gov/ 1591.full.pdf. Pharmacologic Aspects of Cigarette
science-research/peer-review-scientific- * 55. Rodriguez, J., R. Jiang, W.C. Johnson, et Smoking and Nicotine Addiction.’’ New
information-and-assessments/ al. ‘‘The Association of Pipe and Cigar England Journal of Medicine,
completed-peer-reviews. Use with Cotinine Levels, Lung 319(20):1318–30, 1988. Available at
* 46. FDA. FDA’s Response to External Peer Function, and Airflow Obstruction: A 10.1056/nejm198811173192005.
Review on the Science of a Nicotine Cross-Sectional Study.’’ Annals of * 67. Frenk, H., and R. Dar. ‘‘If the Data
Standard for Combusted Tobacco Internal Medicine, 152(4):201–10, 2010. Contradict the Theory, Throw out the
Products, 7/13/2024. Silver Spring, MD: Available at 10.7326/0003–4819–152–4– Data: Nicotine Addiction in the 2010
HHS, FDA, Center for Tobacco Products. 201002160–00004. Report of the Surgeon General.’’ Harm
2025. Available at https://www.fda.gov/ 56. Weglicki, L.S. ‘‘Tobacco Use Assessment: Reduction Journal, 8:12, 2011. Available
science-research/peer-review-scientific- What Exactly Is Your Patient Using and at 10.1186/1477–7517–8–12.
information-and-assessments/ Why Is It Important to Know?’’ Ethnicity 68. Huston-Lyons, D., and C. Kornetsky.
completed-peer-reviews. and Disease, 18(3 Suppl 3):S3–1–6, ‘‘Effects of Nicotine on the Threshold for
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00092 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5123
Rewarding Brain Stimulation in Rats.’’ 81. Hurt, R.D., and C.R. Robertson. ‘‘Prying * 92. Sargent, J.D., J. Gabrielli, A. Budney, et
Pharmacology Biochemistry and Open the Door to the Tobacco Industry’s al. ‘‘Adolescent Smoking
Behavior, 41(4):755–9, 1992. Available at Secrets About Nicotine: The Minnesota Experimentation as a Predictor of Daily
10.1016/0091–3057(92)90223–3. Tobacco Trial.’’ JAMA, 280(13):1173–81, Cigarette Smoking.’’ Drug and Alcohol
69. Perkins, K.A., J.E. Grobe, A. Caggiula, et 1998. Available at 10.1001/ Dependence, 175:55–59, 2017. Available
al. ‘‘Acute Reinforcing Effects of Low- jama.280.13.1173. at 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2017.01.038.
Dose Nicotine Nasal Spray in Humans.’’ 82. Wayne, G.F., and C.M. Carpenter. * 93. DiFranza, J.R., J.A. Savageau, K.
Pharmacology Biochemistry and ‘‘Tobacco Industry Manipulation of Fletcher, et al. ‘‘Symptoms of Tobacco
Behavior, 56(2):235–41, 1997. Available Nicotine Dosing.’’ Handbook of Dependence after Brief Intermittent Use:
at 10.1016/s0091–3057(96)00216-x. Experimental Pharmacology, (192):457– The Development and Assessment of
* 70. Warburton, D.M., and G. Mancuso. 85, 2009. Available at 10.1007/978–3– Nicotine Dependence in Youth-2 Study.’’
‘‘Evaluation of the Information 540–69248–5_16. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent
Processing and Mood Effects of a * 83. Goriounova, N.A., and H.D. Medicine, 161(7):704–10, 2007.
Transdermal Nicotine Patch.’’ Mansvelder. ‘‘Short- and Long-Term Available at 10.1001/archpedi.161.7.704.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), Consequences of Nicotine Exposure * 94. Kandel, D., C. Schaffran, P. Griesler, et
135(3):305–10, 1998. Available at during Adolescence for Prefrontal Cortex al. ‘‘On the Measurement of Nicotine
10.1007/s002130050514. Neuronal Network Function.’’ Cold Dependence in Adolescence:
71. Benowitz, N.L. ‘‘Nicotine Addiction.’’ Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, Comparisons of the mFTQ and a DSM–
Primary Care, 26(3):611–31, 1999. 2(12):a012120, 2012. Available at IV-Based Scale.’’ Journal of Pediatric
Available at 10.1016/s0095– 10.1101/cshperspect.a012120. Psychology, 30(4):319–32, 2005.
4543(05)70120–2. * 84. HHS. E-Cigarette Use among Youth and Available at 10.1093/jpepsy/jsi027.
72. American Psychiatric Association Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon 95. O’Loughlin, J., J. DiFranza, R.F. Tyndale,
Committee on Nomenclature and General. Atlanta, GA: HHS, CDC, et al. ‘‘Nicotine-Dependence Symptoms
Statistics. Diagnostic and Statistical National Center for Chronic Disease Are Associated with Smoking Frequency
Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd Edition. Prevention and Health Promotion, Office in Adolescents.’’ American Journal of
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric on Smoking and Health. 2016. Available Preventive Medicine, 25(3):219–25, 2003.
Association, 1980. Available at at https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_ Available at 10.1016/S0749–
* 73. Hughes, J.R. ‘‘Effects of Abstinence from statistics/sgr/e-cigarettes/pdfs/2016_sgr_ 3797(03)00198–3.
Tobacco: Valid Symptoms and Time entire_report_508.pdf.
* 96. Rose, J.S., L.C. Dierker, and E. Donny.
Course.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco * 85. Yuan, M., S.J. Cross, SE Loughlin, et al.
‘‘Nicotine Dependence Symptoms among
Research, 9(3):315–27, 2007. Available at ‘‘Nicotine and the Adolescent Brain.’’
Recent Onset Adolescent Smokers.’’
10.1080/14622200701188919. Journal of Physiology, 593(16):3397–412,
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 106(2–
74. Hughes, J.R., S.T. Higgins, and W.K. 2015. Available at 10.1113/jp270492.
3):126–32, 2010. Available at 10.1016/
Bickel. ‘‘Nicotine Withdrawal Versus * 86. Substance Abuse and Mental Health
j.drugalcdep.2009.08.012.
Other Drug Withdrawal Syndromes: Services Administration. Key Substance
* 97. CDC. ‘‘Cigarette Smoking among Adults
Similarities and Dissimilarities.’’ Use and Mental Health Indicators in the
and Trends in Smoking Cessation—
Addiction, 89(11):1461–70, 1994. United States: Results from the 2023
United States, 2008.’’ MMWR Morbidity
Available at 10.1111/j.1360– National Survey on Drug Use and
and Mortality Weekly Report,
0443.1994.tb03744.x. Health. Rockville, MD: SAMHSA, Center
58(44):1227–32, 2009. Available at
* 75. Robinson, J.H., and W.S. Pritchard. for Behavioral Health Statistics and
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
‘‘The Role of Nicotine in Tobacco Use.’’ Quality. 2024. Available at https://
mmwrhtml/mm5844a2.htm.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2023-
* 98. Patnode, C.D., J.T. Henderson, E.L.
108(4):397–407, 1992. Available at nsduh-annual-national-report.
Coppola, et al. ‘‘Interventions for
10.1007/bf02247412. 87. Hair, E., M. Bennett, V. Williams, et al.
Tobacco Cessation in Adults, Including
76. Hughes, J.R. ‘‘Measurement of the Effects ‘‘Progression to Established Patterns of
Pregnant Persons: Updated Evidence
of Abstinence from Tobacco: A Cigarette Smoking among Young
Report and Systematic Review for the US
Qualitative Review.’’ Psychology of Adults.’’ Drug and Alcohol Dependence,
Preventive Services Task Force.’’ JAMA,
Addictive Behaviors, 21(2):127–37, 2007. 177:77–83, 2017. Available at 10.1016/
Available at 10.1037/0893– j.drugalcdep.2017.03.040. 325(3):280–298, 2021. Available at
164x.21.2.127. * 88. Thompson, A.B., P.D. Mowery, J.K. 10.1001/jama.2020.23541.
* 77. Robinson, T.E., and K.C. Berridge. ‘‘The Tebes, et al. ‘‘Time Trends in Smoking 99. Kenford, S.L., M.C. Fiore, D.E. Jorenby, et
Neural Basis of Drug Craving: An Onset by Sex and Race/Ethnicity among al. ‘‘Predicting Smoking Cessation. Who
Incentive-Sensitization Theory of Adolescents and Young Adults: Findings Will Quit with and without the Nicotine
Addiction.’’ Brain Research Brain from the 2006–2013 National Survey on Patch.’’ JAMA, 271(8):589–94, 1994.
Research Reviews, 18(3):247–91, 1993. Drug Use and Health.’’ Nicotine and Available at 10.1001/jama.271.8.589.
Available at 10.1016/0165– Tobacco Research, 20(3):312–320, 2018. * 100. Yudkin, P., K. Hey, S. Roberts, et al.
0173(93)90013-p. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntx010. ‘‘Abstinence from Smoking Eight Years
78. Skinner, M.D., and H.J. Aubin. ‘‘Craving’s * 89. CDC. ‘‘Selected Cigarette Smoking after Participation in Randomised
Place in Addiction Theory: Initiation and Quitting Behaviors among Controlled Trial of Nicotine Patch.’’
Contributions of the Major Models.’’ High School Students—United States, British Medical Journal, 327(7405):28–9,
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 1997.’’ MMWR Morbidity and Mortality 2003. Available at 10.1136/
Reviews, 34(4):606–23, 2010. Available Weekly Report, 47(19):386–9, 1998. bmj.327.7405.28.
at 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.11.024. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/ * 101. HHS. Women and Smoking: A Report
* 79. Verheul, R., W. van den Brink, and P. preview/mmwrhtml/00052816.htm. of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA:
Geerlings. ‘‘A Three-Pathway 90. Choi, W.S., J.P. Pierce, E.A. Gilpin, et al. CDC, Office on Smoking and Health.
Psychobiological Model of Craving for ‘‘Which Adolescent Experimenters 2001. Available at https://archive.
Alcohol.’’ Alcohol and Alcoholism, Progress to Established Smoking in the
cdc.gov/www_cdc_gov/tobacco/sgr/2001/
34(2):197–222, 1999. Available at United States.’’ American Journal of index.htm.
10.1093/alcalc/34.2.197. Preventive Medicine, 13(5):385–91, 1997. * 102. National Cancer Institute. ‘‘Seer
* 80. Dar, R., F. Stronguin, R. Marouani, et Available at 10.1016/S0749– Cancer Statistics Factsheets: Cancer
al. ‘‘Craving to Smoke in Orthodox 3797(18)30159–4. Disparities.’’ SEER.Cancer.gov. Accessed
Jewish Smokers Who Abstain on the * 91. Mowery, P.D., M.C. Farrelly, M.L. July 7, 2021. https://seer.cancer.gov/
Sabbath: A Comparison to a Baseline and Haviland, et al. ‘‘Progression to statfacts/html/disparities.html
a Forced Abstinence Workday.’’ Established Smoking among U.S. * 103. Schabath, M.B., W.D. Cress, and T.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), Youths.’’ American Journal of Public Mun˜oz-Antonia. ‘‘Racial and Ethnic
183(3):294–9, 2005. Available at Health, 94(2):331–7, 2004. Available at Differences in the Epidemiology and
10.1007/s00213–005–0192–3. 10.2105/ajph.94.2.331. Genomics of Lung Cancer.’’ Cancer
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00093 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5124 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Control, 23(4):338–346, 2016. Available and Behavior, 42(6):742–51, 2015. Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander
at 10.1177/107327481602300405. Available at 10.1177/1090198115577376. Populations in California.’’ Cancer
* 104. Siegel, R.L., K.D. Miller, H.E. Fuchs, * 115. Ellis, L., A.J. Canchola, D. Spiegel, et Epidemiology, Biomarkers and
et al. ‘‘Cancer Statistics, 2022.’’ CA: A al. ‘‘Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Prevention, 30(7):1387–1396, 2021.
Cancer Journal for Clinicians, 72(1):7– Cancer Survival: The Contribution of Available at 10.1158/1055–9965.Epi-20–
33, 2022. Available at 10.3322/ Tumor, Sociodemographic, Institutional, 1528.
caac.21708. and Neighborhood Characteristics.’’ * 125. Hamad, R., J. Penko, D.S. Kazi, et al.
* 105. CDC. ‘‘Vital Signs: Avoidable Deaths Journal of Clinical Oncology, 36(1):25– ‘‘Association of Low Socioeconomic
from Heart Disease, Stroke, and 33, 2018. Available at 10.1200/ Status with Premature Coronary Heart
Hypertensive Disease—United States, jco.2017.74.2049. Disease in US Adults.’’ JAMA
2001–2010.’’ MMWR Morbidity and * 116. Fagan, P., E.T. Moolchan, D. Cardiology, 5(8):899–908, 2020.
Mortality Weekly Report, 62(35):721–7, Lawrence, et al. ‘‘Identifying Health Available at 10.1001/
2013. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/ Disparities across the Tobacco jamacardio.2020.1458.
mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ Continuum.’’ Addiction, 102 Suppl 2:5– * 126. Vurbic, D., V.S. Harder, R.R. Redner,
mm6235a4.htm. 29, 2007. Available at 10.1111/j.1360– et al. ‘‘Co-Occurring Obesity and
* 106. Keenan, N.L., and K.M. Shaw. 0443.2007.01952.x. Smoking among U.S. Women of
‘‘Coronary Heart Disease and Stroke * 117. Haiman, C.A., D.O. Stram, L.R. Reproductive Age: Associations with
Deaths—United States, 2006.’’ MMWR Wilkens, et al. ‘‘Ethnic and Racial Educational Attainment and Health
Supplements, 60(1):62–6, 2011. Differences in the Smoking-Related Risk Biomarkers and Outcomes.’’ Preventive
Available at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/ of Lung Cancer.’’ New England Journal of Medicine, 80:60–6, 2015. Available at
preview/mmwrhtml/su6001a13.htm?s_ Medicine, 354(4):333–42, 2006. 10.1016/j.ypmed.2015.05.020.
cid=su6001a13_w. Available at 10.1056/NEJMoa033250. * 127. Assari, S., and R. Mistry. ‘‘Educational
* 107. National Center for Health * 118. Howe, H.L., A. Lake, M.J. Schymura, Attainment and Smoking Status in a
Statistics.’’Racial and Ethnic Disparities et al. ‘‘Indirect Method to Estimate National Sample of American Adults;
in Heart Disease.’’ CDC, National Center Specific Hispanic Group Cancer Rates.’’ Evidence for the Blacks’ Diminished
for Health Statistics, 2019. https:// Cancer Causes and Control, 20(7):1215– Return.’’ International Journal of
www.cdc.gov/nchs/hus/spotlight/ 26, 2009. Available at 10.1007/s10552– Environmental Research and Public
HeartDiseaseSpotlight_2019_0404.pdf. 009–9398–8. Health, 15(4), 2018. Available at
* 108. Safford, M.M., T.M. Brown, P.M. * 119. CDC. ‘‘Cancer Mortality among 10.3390/ijerph15040763.
Muntner, et al. ‘‘Association of Race and American Indians and Alaska Natives— * 128. Smith, P.H., C.M. Mazure, and S.A.
Sex with Risk of Incident Acute United States, 1994–1998.’’ MMWR McKee. ‘‘Smoking and Mental Illness in
Coronary Heart Disease Events.’’ JAMA, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, the U.S. Population.’’ Tobacco Control,
308(17):1768–74, 2012. Available at 52(30):704–7, 2003. Available at https:// 23(e2):e147–53, 2014. Available at
10.1001/jama.2012.14306. www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/ 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013–051466.
* 109. Singh, G.K., M. Siahpush, R.E. Azuine, mmwrhtml/mm5230a4.htm. * 129. Stanton, C.A., D.R. Keith, D.E.
et al. ‘‘Widening Socioeconomic and * 120. HHS. Eliminating Tobacco-Related Gaalema, et al. ‘‘Trends in Tobacco Use
Racial Disparities in Cardiovascular Disease and Death: Addressing among US Adults with Chronic Health
Disease Mortality in the United States, Disparities—a Report of the Surgeon Conditions: National Survey on Drug Use
1969–2013.’’ International Journal of General. Atlanta, GA:: HHS, CDC, and Health 2005–2013.’’ Preventive
Maternal and Child Health and AIDS, National Center for Chronic Disease Medicine, 92:160–168, 2016. Available at
3(2):106–18, 2015. Available at https:// Prevention and Health Promotion, Office 10.1016/j.ypmed.2016.04.008.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/ on Smoking and Health. 2024. Available 130. Callaghan, R.C., S. Veldhuizen, T.
PMC5005986/pdf/IJMA-3-106.pdf at https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/ Jeysingh, et al. ‘‘Patterns of Tobacco-
* 110. Van Dyke, M., S. Greer, E. Odom, et files/2024-sgr-tobacco-related-health- Related Mortality among Individuals
al. ‘‘Heart Disease Death Rates among disparities-full-report.pdf. Diagnosed with Schizophrenia, Bipolar
Blacks and Whites Aged ≥35 Years— * 121. Odani, S., B.S. Armour, C.M. Disorder, or Depression.’’ Journal of
United States, 1968–2015.’’ MMWR Graffunder, et al. ‘‘Prevalence and Psychiatric Research, 48(1):102–10,
Surveillance Summaries, 67(5):1–11, Disparities in Tobacco Product Use 2014. Available at 10.1016/
2018. Available at 10.15585/ among American Indians/Alaska j.jpsychires.2013.09.014.
mmwr.ss6705a1. Natives—United States, 2010–2015.’’ * 131. Prochaska, J.J., S. Das, and K.C. Young-
111. Pulvers, K., D.R. Romero, L. Blanco, et MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Wolff. ‘‘Smoking, Mental Illness, and
al. ‘‘Light and Intermittent Smoking Report, 66(50):1374–1378, 2017. Public Health.’’ Annual Review of Public
among California Black, Hispanic/Latino, Available at 10.15585/mmwr.mm6650a2. Health, 38:165–185, 2017. Available at
and Non-Hispanic White Men and 122. Mowery, P.D., S.R. Dube, S.L. Thorne, 10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031816–
Women.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco et al. ‘‘Disparities in Smoking-Related 044618.
Research, 17(6):755–9, 2015. Available at Mortality among American Indians/ 132. Veldhuizen, S., and R.C. Callaghan.
10.1093/ntr/ntu221. Alaska Natives.’’ American Journal of ‘‘Cause-Specific Mortality among People
* 112. Trinidad, D.R., E.J. Pe´rez-Stable, S.L. Preventive Medicine, 49(5):738–744, Previously Hospitalized with Opioid-
Emery, et al. ‘‘Intermittent and Light 2015. Available at 10.1016/ Related Conditions: A Retrospective
Daily Smoking across Racial/Ethnic j.amepre.2015.05.002. Cohort Study.’’ Annals of Epidemiology,
Groups in the United States.’’ Nicotine * 123. HHS. Tobacco Use among US Racial/ 24(8):620–4, 2014. Available at 10.1016/
and Tobacco Research, 11(2):203–10, Ethnic Minority Groups: African j.annepidem.2014.06.001.
2009. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntn018. Americans, American Indians and * 133. Baggett, T.P., Y. Chang, B.C. Porneala,
* 113. Trinidad, D.R., E.J. Pe´rez-Stable, M.M. Alaska Natives, Asian Americans and et al. ‘‘Disparities in Cancer Incidence,
White, et al. ‘‘A Nationwide Analysis of Pacific Islanders, Hispanics: A Report of Stage, and Mortality at Boston Health
US Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Smoking the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: HHS, Care for the Homeless Program.’’
Behaviors, Smoking Cessation, and CDC, National Center for Chronic American Journal of Preventive
Cessation-Related Factors.’’ American Disease Prevention, National Center for Medicine, 49(5):694–702, 2015.
Journal of Public Health, 101(4):699–706, Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Available at 10.1016/
2011. Available at 10.2105/ Promotion, Office on Smoking and j.amepre.2015.03.038.
ajph.2010.191668. Health. 1998. Available at https:// * 134. Nonnemaker, J., B. Rostron, P. Hall, et
* 114. Trinidad, D.R., B. Xie, P. Fagan, et al. core.ac.uk/download/pdf/ al. ‘‘Mortality and Economic Costs from
‘‘Disparities in the Population 144178502.pdf. Regular Cigar Use in the United States,
Distribution of African American and 124. Medina, H.N., K.E. Callahan, C.R. 2010.’’ American Journal of Public
Non-Hispanic White Smokers Along the Morris, et al. ‘‘Cancer Mortality Health, 104(9):e86–91, 2014. Available at
Quitting Continuum.’’ Health Education Disparities among Asian American and 10.2105/ajph.2014.301991.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00094 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5125
* 135. Shapiro, J.A., E.J. Jacobs, and M.J. United States.’’ Health Education and * 156. King, B.A., D.M. Homa, S.R. Dube, et
Thun. ‘‘Cigar Smoking in Men and Risk Behavior, 47(4):602–610, 2020. Available al. ‘‘Exposure to Secondhand Smoke and
of Death from Tobacco-Related Cancers.’’ at 10.1177/1090198120925414. Attitudes toward Smoke-Free
Journal of the National Cancer Institute, * 145. Walton, K., A.S. Gentzke, R. Murphy- Workplaces among Employed U.S.
92(4):333–7, 2000. Available at https:// Hoefer, et al. ‘‘Exposure to Secondhand Adults: Findings from the National
academic.oup.com/jnci/article/92/4/333/ Smoke in Homes and Vehicles among US Adult Tobacco Survey.’’ Nicotine and
2624751?login=true. Youths, United States, 2011–2019.’’ Tobacco Research, 16(10):1307–18, 2014.
* 136. National Cancer Institute. ‘‘Seer Preventing Chronic Disease, 17:E103, Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntu069.
Cancer Stat Facts: Common Cancer 2020. Available at 10.5888/ 157. Dai, H., and J. Hao. ‘‘The Prevalence of
Sites.’’ SEER.Cancer.gov. Accessed pcd17.200107. Exposure to Workplace Secondhand
February 27, 2023. https:// * 146. Assari, S., and M. Bazargan. ‘‘Second- Smoke in the United States: 2010 to
seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/ Hand Smoke Exposure at Home in the 2015.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Research,
common.html. United States; Minorities’ Diminished 19(11):1300–1307, 2017. Available at
* 137. California Environmental Protection Returns.’’ International Journal of Travel 10.1093/ntr/ntw306.
Agency. Proposed Identification of Medicine and Global Health, 7(4):135– * 158. International Agency for Research on
Environmental Tobacco Smoke as a 141, 2019. Available at 10.15171/ Cancer. ‘‘Tobacco Smoke and
Toxic Air Contaminant. UCSF—Center ijtmgh.2019.28. Involuntary Smoking.’’ IARC Monograph
for Tobacco Control Research and * 147. King, B.A., S.R. Dube, and D.M. Homa. Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to
Education, CEPA, Air Resources Board, ‘‘Smoke-Free Rules and Secondhand Humans, 83:1–1438, 2004. Available at
Office of Environmental Health Hazard Smoke Exposure in Homes and Vehicles https://publications.iarc.fr/Book-And-
Assessment. 2005. Available at https:// among US Adults, 2009–2010.’’ Report-Series/Iarc-Monographs-On-The-
escholarship.org/uc/item/8hk6960q. Preventing Chronic Disease, 10:E79, Identification-Of-Carcinogenic-Hazards-
* 138. Jacob, P., 3rd, N.L. Benowitz, H. 2013. Available at 10.5888/ To-Humans/Tobacco-Smoke-And-
Destaillats, et al. ‘‘Thirdhand Smoke: pcd10.120218. Involuntary-Smoking-2004.
New Evidence, Challenges, and Future * 148. Zhang, X., A.P. Martinez-Donate, D. * 159. Chang, C.M., B.L. Rostron, J.T. Chang,
Directions.’’ Chemical Research in Kuo, et al. ‘‘Trends in Home Smoking et al. ‘‘Biomarkers of Exposure among
Toxicology, 30(1):270–294, 2017. Bans in the U.S.A., 1995–2007: U.S. Adult Cigar Smokers: Population
Prevalence, Discrepancies and
Available at 10.1021/ Assessment of Tobacco and Health
Disparities.’’ Tobacco Control,
acs.chemrestox.6b00343. (PATH) Study Wave 1 (2013–2014).’’
21(3):330–6, 2012. Available at 10.1136/
* 139. Shastri, S.S., R. Talluri, and S. Shete. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and
tc.2011.043802.
‘‘Disparities in Secondhand Smoke Prevention, 28(5):943–953, 2019.
* 149. Arku, R.E., G. Adamkiewicz, J.
Exposure in the United States: National Available at 10.1158/1055–9965.Epi-18–
Vallarino, et al. ‘‘Seasonal Variability in
Health and Nutrition Examination 0539.
Environmental Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Survey 2011–2018.’’ JAMA Internal * 160. Chen, J., A. Kettermann, B.L. Rostron,
in Public Housing Developments.’’
Medicine, 181(1):134–137, 2021. et al. ‘‘Biomarkers of Exposure among
Indoor Air, 25(1):13–20, 2015. Available
Available at 10.1001/ U.S. Cigar Smokers: An Analysis of
at 10.1111/ina.12121.
jamainternmed.2020.3975. 1999–2012 National Health and
* 150. King, B.A., S.D. Babb, M.A. Tynan, et
140. Benowitz, N.L. The Use of Biologic Fluid Nutrition Examination Survey
al. ‘‘National and State Estimates of
Samples in Assessing Tobacco Smoke (NHANES) Data.’’ Cancer Epidemiology,
Secondhand Smoke Infiltration among
Consumption. In: Grabowski, J., C. Bell, Biomarkers and Prevention,
U.S. Multiunit Housing Residents.’’
(Eds.). Measurement in the Analysis and 23(12):2906–15, 2014. Available at
Nicotine and Tobacco Research,
Treatment of Smoking Behavior. NIDA 10.1158/1055–9965.Epi-14–0849.
15(7):1316–21, 2013. Available at
Research Monograph Series; vol. 48. * 161. Henley, S.J., M.J. Thun, A. Chao, et al.
10.1093/ntr/nts254.
Rockville, MD: National Institute on ‘‘Association between Exclusive Pipe
* 151. King, B.A., M.J. Travers, K.M.
Drug Abuse. 1983:6–26. Available at Smoking and Mortality from Cancer and
Cummings, et al. ‘‘Secondhand Smoke
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Transfer in Multiunit Housing.’’ Nicotine Other Diseases.’’ Journal of the National
6443145/. and Tobacco Research, 12(11):1133–41, Cancer Institute, 96(11):853–61, 2004.
* 141. Homa, D.M., L.J. Neff, B.A. King, et al. 2010. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntq162. Available at
‘‘Vital Signs: Disparities in Nonsmokers’ * 152. Kraev, T.A., G. Adamkiewicz, S.K. * 162. HHS. Reducing the Health
Exposure to Secondhand Smoke—United Hammond, et al. ‘‘Indoor Concentrations Consequences of Smoking—25 Years of
States, 1999–2012.’’ MMWR Morbidity of Nicotine in Low-Income, Multi-Unit Progress. A Report of the Surgeon
and Mortality Weekly Report, 64(4):103– Housing: Associations with Smoking General. Rockville, MD: HHS, Public
8, 2015. Available at https://www.ncbi. Behaviours and Housing Health Service, CDC, Center for Chronic
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4584848/ Characteristics.’’ Tobacco Control, Disease Prevention and Health
pdf/103-108.pdf. 18(6):438–44, 2009. Available at Promotion, Office on Smoking and
142. Tsai, J., D.M. Homa, L.J. Neff, et al. 10.1136/tc.2009.029728. Health. 1989. Available at https://
‘‘Trends in Secondhand Smoke * 153. Snyder, K., J.H. Vick, and B.A. King. stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/13240.
Exposure, 2011–2018: Impact and ‘‘Smoke-Free Multiunit Housing: A * 163. Chang, C.M., C.G. Corey, B.L. Rostron,
Implications of Expanding Serum Review of the Scientific Literature.’’ et al. ‘‘Systematic Review of Cigar
Cotinine Range.’’ American Journal of Tobacco Control, 25(1):9–20, 2016. Smoking and All Cause and Smoking
Preventive Medicine, 61(3):e109-e117, Available at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol- Related Mortality.’’ BMC Public Health,
2021. Available at 10.1016/ 2014–051849. 15:390, 2015. Available at 10.1186/
j.amepre.2021.04.004. * 154. Nguyen, K.H., Y. Gomez, D.M. Homa, s12889–015–1617–5.
* 143. Cochran, S.D., F.C. Bandiera, and V.M. et al. ‘‘Tobacco Use, Secondhand Smoke, 164. Baker, F., S.R. Ainsworth, J.T. Dye, et al.
Mays. ‘‘Sexual Orientation-Related and Smoke-Free Home Rules in ‘‘Health Risks Associated with Cigar
Differences in Tobacco Use and Multiunit Housing.’’ American Journal of Smoking.’’ JAMA, 284(6):735–40, 2000.
Secondhand Smoke Exposure among US Preventive Medicine, 51(5):682–692, Available at 10.1001/jama.284.6.735.
Adults Aged 20 to 59 Years: 2003–2010 2016. Available at 10.1016/ 165. Sasco, A.J., M.B. Secretan, and K. Straif.
National Health and Nutrition j.amepre.2016.05.009. ‘‘Tobacco Smoking and Cancer: A Brief
Examination Surveys.’’ American * 155. Wilson, K.M., M.R. Torok, R.C. Review of Recent Epidemiological
Journal of Public Health, 103(10):1837– McMillen, et al. ‘‘Tobacco-Smoke Evidence.’’ Lung Cancer, 45 Suppl 2:S3–
44, 2013. Available at 10.2105/ Incursions and Satisfaction among 9, 2004. Available at 10.1016/
ajph.2013.301423. Residents with Children in Multiunit j.lungcan.2004.07.998.
144. Azagba, S., K. Latham, and L. Shan. Housing, United States, 2013.’’ Public * 166. Iribarren, C., I.S. Tekawa, S. Sidney,
‘‘Sociodemographic Differences in Health Reports, 132(6):637–645, 2017. et al. ‘‘Effect of Cigar Smoking on the
Secondhand Smoke Exposure in the Available at 10.1177/0033354917732767. Risk of Cardiovascular Disease, Chronic
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00095 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5126 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, and Implications for Health Disparities.’’ * 187. Schwartz, E., N. Onnen, P.F.
Cancer in Men.’’ New England Journal of Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Craigmile, et al. ‘‘The Legacy of
Medicine, 340(23):1773–80, 1999. 21(7):896–902, 2019. Available at Redlining: Associations between
Available at 10.1056/ 10.1093/ntr/nty244. Historical Neighborhood Mapping and
nejm199906103402301. 177. Kirchner, T.R., A.C. Villanti, J. Cantrell, Contemporary Tobacco Retailer Density
* 167. Wang, Y., H.Y. Sung, T. Yao, et al. et al. ‘‘Tobacco Retail Outlet Advertising in Ohio.’’ Health and Place, 68:102529,
‘‘Health Care Utilization and Practices and Proximity to Schools, 2021. Available at 10.1016/
Expenditures Attributable to Cigar Parks and Public Housing Affect Synar j.healthplace.2021.102529.
Smoking among U.S. Adults, 2000– Underage Sales Violations in * 188. Burgoon, M.L., T. Albani, B. Keller-
2015.’’ Public Health Reports, Washington, DC.’’ Tobacco Control, Hamilton, et al. ‘‘Exposures to the
133(3):329–337, 2018. Available at 24(e1):e52–8, 2015. Available at 10.1136/ Tobacco Retail Environment among
10.1177/0033354918769873. tobaccocontrol-2013–051239. Adolescent Boys in Urban and Rural
* 168. Christensen, C.H., B. Rostron, C. * 178. Kong, A.Y., T.L. Queen, S.D. Golden, Environments.’’ American Journal of
Cosgrove, et al. ‘‘Association of Cigarette, et al. ‘‘Neighborhood Disparities in the Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 45(2):217–226,
Cigar, and Pipe Use with Mortality Risk Availability, Advertising, Promotion, 2019. Available at 10.1080/
in the U.S. Population.’’ JAMA Internal and Youth Appeal of Little Cigars and 00952990.2018.1549562.
Medicine, 2018. Available at 10.1001/ Cigarillos, United States, 2015.’’ Nicotine * 189. Cruz, T.B., R. McConnell, B.W. Low,
jamainternmed.2017.8625. and Tobacco Research, 22(12):2170– et al. ‘‘Tobacco Marketing and
* 169. Inoue-Choi, M., M.S. Shiels, T.S. 2177, 2020. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ Subsequent Use of Cigarettes, E-
McNeel, et al. ‘‘Contemporary ntaa005. Cigarettes, and Hookah in Adolescents.’’
Associations of Exclusive Cigarette, * 179. Lee, J.G., L. Henriksen, SW Rose, et Nicotine and Tobacco Research,
Cigar, Pipe, and Smokeless Tobacco Use al. ‘‘A Systematic Review of 21(7):926–932, 2019. Available at
with Overall and Cause-Specific Neighborhood Disparities in Point-of- 10.1093/ntr/nty107.
Mortality in the United States.’’ JNCI Sale Tobacco Marketing.’’ American * 190. Lovato, C., A. Watts, and L.F. Stead.
Cancer Spectrum, 3(3):pkz036, 2019. Journal of Public Health, 105(9):e8–18, ‘‘Impact of Tobacco Advertising and
Available at 10.1093/jncics/pkz036. 2015. Available at 10.2105/ Promotion on Increasing Adolescent
* 170. Eichner, J.E., W. Wang, Y. Zhang, et ajph.2015.302777. Smoking Behaviours.’’ Cochrane
* 180. Carroll, D.M., C. Soto, L. Baezconde-
al. ‘‘Tobacco Use and Cardiovascular Database of Systematic Reviews,
Garbanati, et al. ‘‘Tobacco Industry
Disease among American Indians: The 2011(10):Cd003439, 2011. Available at
Marketing Exposure and Commercial
Strong Heart Study.’’ International 10.1002/14651858.CD003439.pub2.
Tobacco Product Use Disparities among
Journal of Environmental Research and * 191. Moran, M.B., K. Heley, J.P. Pierce, et
American Indians and Alaska Natives.’’
Public Health, 7(10):3816–30, 2010. al. ‘‘Ethnic and Socioeconomic
Substance Use and Misuse, 55(2):261–
Available at 10.3390/ijerph7103816. Disparities in Recalled Exposure to and
270, 2020. Available at 10.1080/
171. Lee, E.T., T.K. Welty, R. Fabsitz, et al. Self-Reported Impact of Tobacco
10826084.2019.1664589.
‘‘The Strong Heart Study. A Study of Marketing and Promotions.’’ Health
* 181. Fakunle, D.O., F.C. Curriero, P.J. Leaf,
Cardiovascular Disease in American Communication, 34(3):280–289, 2019.
et al. ‘‘Black, White, or Green? The
Indians: Design and Methods.’’ American Available at 10.1080/
Effects of Racial Composition and
Journal of Epidemiology, 132(6):1141–55, 10410236.2017.1407227.
Socioeconomic Status on Neighborhood-
1990. Available at 10.1093/ * 192. Rose, S.W., A.M. Glasser, Y. Zhou, et
Level Tobacco Outlet Density.’’ Ethnicity
oxfordjournals.aje.a115757. al. ‘‘Adolescent Tobacco Coupon
and Health, 26(7):1012–1027, 2019.
* 172. Elias, J., Y.H. Hendlin, and P.M. Ling. Receipt, Vulnerability Characteristics
Available at 10.1080/
‘‘Public Versus Internal Conceptions of and Subsequent Tobacco Use: Analysis
13557858.2019.1620178.
Addiction: An Analysis of Internal of PATH Study, Waves 1 and 2.’’
* 182. Glasser, A.M., N. Onnen, P.F.
Philip Morris Documents.’’ PLoS Tobacco Control, 27(e1):e50-e56, 2018.
Craigmile, et al. ‘‘Associations between
Medicine, 15(5):e1002562, 2018. Available at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-
Disparities in Tobacco Retailer Density
Available at 10.1371/ and Disparities in Tobacco Use.’’ 2017–054141.
journal.pmed.1002562. Preventive Medicine, 154:106910, 2022. * 193. Marsh, L., P. Vaneckova, L. Robertson,
* 173. National Cancer Institute. The Role of Available at 10.1016/ et al. ‘‘Association between Density and
the Media in Promoting and Reducing j.ypmed.2021.106910. Proximity of Tobacco Retail Outlets with
Tobacco Use. Tobacco Control * 183. Lee, J.G., D.L. Sun, N.M. Schleicher, Smoking: A Systematic Review of Youth
Monograph No. 19. NIH Pub. No. 07– et al. ‘‘Inequalities in Tobacco Outlet Studies.’’ Health Place, 67:102275, 2021.
6242, Bethesda, MD: HHS, National Density by Race, Ethnicity and Available at 10.1016/
Institutes of Health, National Cancer Socioeconomic Status, 2012, USA: j.healthplace.2019.102275.
Institute. 2008. Available at https:// Results from the Aspire Study.’’ Journal 194. Iglesias-Rios, L., and M. Parascandola.
cancercontrol.cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/ of Epidemiology and Community Health, ‘‘A Historical Review of R.J. Reynolds’
monographs/monograph-19. 71(5):487–492, 2017. Available at Strategies for Marketing Tobacco to
* 174. National Cancer Institute. A 10.1136/jech-2016–208475. Hispanics in the United States.’’
Socioecological Approach to Addressing * 184. Mills, S.D., A.Y. Kong, A.E. Reimold, American Journal of Public Health,
Tobacco-Related Health Disparities. et al. ‘‘Sociodemographic Disparities in 103(5):e15–27, 2013. Available at
Tobacco Control Monograph 22. NIH Tobacco Retailer Density in the United 10.2105/ajph.2013.301256.
Pub. No. 17–CA–8035A, Bethesda, MD: States, 2000–2017.’’ Nicotine and * 195. D’Silva, J., E. O’Gara, and N.T.
HHS, National Institutes of Health, Tobacco Research, 24(8):1291–1299, Villaluz. ‘‘Tobacco Industry
National Cancer Institute. 2017. 2022. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntac020. Misappropriation of American Indian
Available at https://cancercontrol. * 185. Primack, B.A., J.E. Bost, S.R. Land, et Culture and Traditional Tobacco.’’
cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/monographs/ al. ‘‘Volume of Tobacco Advertising in Tobacco Control, 27(e1):e57-e64, 2018.
monograph-22. African American Markets: Systematic Available at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol–
* 175. Cruz, T.B., SW Rose, B.A. Lienemann, Review and Meta-Analysis.’’ Public 2017–053950.
et al. ‘‘Pro-Tobacco Marketing and Anti- Health Reports, 122(5):607–15, 2007. * 196. Brown-Johnson, C.G., L.J. England,
Tobacco Campaigns Aimed at Vulnerable Available at 10.1177/ S.A. Glantz, et al. ‘‘Tobacco Industry
Populations: A Review of the Literature.’’ 003335490712200508. Marketing to Low Socioeconomic Status
Tobacco Induced Diseases, 17:68, 2019. * 186. Rodriguez, D., H.A. Carlos, A.M. Women in the U.S.A.’’ Tobacco Control,
Available at 10.18332/tid/111397. Adachi-Mejia, et al. ‘‘Predictors of 23(e2):e139–46, 2014. Available at
* 176. Giovenco, D.P., T.E. Spillane, and J.M. Tobacco Outlet Density Nationwide: A 10.1136/tobaccocontrol–2013–051224.
Merizier. ‘‘Neighborhood Differences in Geographic Analysis.’’ Tobacco Control, * 197. Apollonio, D.E., and R.E. Malone.
Alternative Tobacco Product Availability 22(5):349–55, 2013. Available at ‘‘Marketing to the Marginalised: Tobacco
and Advertising in New York City: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2011–050120. Industry Targeting of the Homeless and
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00096 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5127
Mentally Ill.’’ Tobacco Control, Trajectories of Youth Smoking.’’ * 220. Henriksen, L., N.C. Schleicher, T.O.
14(6):409–15, 2005. Available at Addiction, 98 Suppl 1:79–103, 2003. Johnson, et al. ‘‘Retail Tobacco
10.1136/tc.2005.011890. Available at 10.1046/j.1360- Marketing in Rural Versus Nonrural
* 198. Prochaska, J.J., S.M. Hall, and L.A. 0443.98.s1.6.x. Counties: Product Availability,
Bero. ‘‘Tobacco Use among Individuals * 210. Christakis, N.A., and J.H. Fowler. ‘‘The Discounts, and Prices.’’ Health
with Schizophrenia: What Role Has the Collective Dynamics of Smoking in a Promotion Practice, 21(1_suppl):27s–
Tobacco Industry Played?’’ Large Social Network.’’ New England 36s, 2020. Available at 10.1177/
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34(3):555–67, Journal of Medicine, 358(21):2249–58, 1524839919888652.
2008. Available at 10.1093/schbul/ 2008. Available at 10.1056/ 221. Nicksic, NE, R.S. Bono, A.K. Rudy, et al.
sbm117. NEJMsa0706154. ‘‘Smoking Status and Racial/Ethnic
* 199. Philip Morris USA, and Y. Robinson. 211. Etcheverry, P.E., and C.R. Agnew. Disparities in Youth Exposure to
Cem’s Gay and Lesbian Marketing ‘‘Romantic Partner and Friend Influences Tobacco Advertising.’’ Journal of
Efforts. Philip Morris Records; Master on Young Adult Cigarette Smoking: Ethnicity in Substance Abuse, 21(3):959–
Settlement Agreement, 1997. Available Comparing Close Others’ Smoking and 974, 2022. Available at 10.1080/
at https://www.industrydocuments. Injunctive Norms over Time.’’ 15332640.2020.1815113.
ucsf.edu/docs/xrwn0172. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, * 222. Ribisl, K.M., H. D’Angelo, A.L. Feld,
* 200. R.J. Reynolds. Project SCUM. R.J. 22(3):313–25, 2008. Available at et al. ‘‘Disparities in Tobacco Marketing
Reynolds Records; Master Settlement 10.1037/0893-164x.22.3.313. and Product Availability at the Point of
Agreement, 1995. Available at https:// 212. Azagba, S., and L. Shan. ‘‘Exposure to Sale: Results of a National Study.’’
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ Tobacco and E-Cigarette Advertisements Preventive Medicine, 105:381–388, 2017.
sfck0098. by Sexual Identity Status among High Available at 10.1016/
201. Stevens, P., L.M. Carlson, and J.M. School Students.’’ Addictive Behaviors, j.ypmed.2017.04.010.
Hinman. ‘‘An Analysis of Tobacco 125:107165, 2022. Available at 10.1016/ * 223. Smiley, S.L., N. Kintz, Y.L. Rodriguez,
Industry Marketing to Lesbian, Gay, j.addbeh.2021.107165. et al. ‘‘Disparities in Retail Marketing for
Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) * 213. Begay, C., C. Soto, L. Baezconde- Little Cigars and Cigarillos in Los
Populations: Strategies for Mainstream Garbanati, et al. ‘‘Cigarette and E- Angeles, California.’’ Addictive
Tobacco Control and Prevention.’’ Cigarette Retail Marketing on and near Behaviors Reports, 9:100149, 2019.
Health Promotion Practice, 5(3 Available at 10.1016/
California Tribal Lands.’’ Health
Suppl):129s–134s, 2004. Available at Promotion Practice, 21(1_suppl):18s– j.abrep.2018.100149.
10.1177/1524839904264617. * 224. Soneji, S., K.E. Knutzen, A.S.L. Tan,
26s, 2020. Available at 10.1177/
* 202. Offen, N., E.A. Smith, and R.E. et al. ‘‘Online Tobacco Marketing among
1524839919883254.
Malone. ‘‘Is Tobacco a Gay Issue? US Adolescent Sexual, Gender, Racial,
214. Chen-Sankey, J., J.B. Unger, E. Bernat, et
Interviews with Leaders of the Lesbian, and Ethnic Minorities.’’ Addictive
al. ‘‘Price Promotion Receipt and Use
Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Behaviors, 95:189–196, 2019. Available
Progression of Any Tobacco, Cigarettes,
Community.’’ Culture Health and at 10.1016/j.addbeh.2019.03.015.
E-Cigarettes and Cigars among US Youth
Sexuality, 10(2):143–57, 2008. Available * 225. Soneji, S., J. Yang, M.B. Moran, et al.
between 2016 and 2018.’’ Tobacco
at 10.1080/13691050701656284. ‘‘Engagement with Online Tobacco
Control, 2021. Available at 10.1136/
203. Portugal, C., T.B. Cruz, L. Espinoza, et Marketing among Adolescents in the
tobaccocontrol-2021-056667.
al. ‘‘Countering Tobacco Industry United States: 2013–2014 to 2014–2015.’’
* 215. Chen-Sankey, J.C., J. van de Venne, S.
Sponsorship of Hispanic/Latino Nicotine and Tobacco Research,
Westneat, et al. ‘‘Real-Time Context of
Organizations through Policy Adoption: 21(7):918–925, 2019. Available at
Tobacco Marketing Exposure and
A Case Study.’’ Health Promotion 10.1093/ntr/nty086.
Community Vulnerability—an Ecological
Practice, 5(3 Suppl):143s–156s, 2004. 226. Tan, A.S.L., E.P. Hanby, A. Sanders-
Momentary Assessment among Young
Available at 10.1177/1524839904264623. Jackson, et al. ‘‘Inequities in Tobacco
Adults.’’ Annals of Behavioral Medicine,
* 204. Yerger, V. ‘‘What More Evidence Is Advertising Exposure among Young
56(6):620–631, 2022. Available at
Needed? Remove Menthol Cigarettes Adult Sexual, Racial and Ethnic
from the Marketplace-Now.’’ Tobacco 10.1093/abm/kaab066. Minorities: Examining Intersectionality
Control, 31(4):493–494, 2022. Available * 216. Choi, K., SW Rose, Y. Zhou, et al. of Sexual Orientation with Race and
at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2021-056988. ‘‘Exposure to Multimedia Tobacco Ethnicity.’’ Tobacco Control, 30(1):84–
* 205. Yerger, V.B., and R.E. Malone. Marketing and Product Use among 93, 2021. Available at 10.1136/
‘‘African American Leadership Groups: Youth: A Longitudinal Analysis.’’ tobaccocontrol-2019-055313.
Smoking with the Enemy.’’ Tobacco Nicotine and Tobacco Research, * 227. Jackson, I., A. Etuk, N. Jackson, et al.
Control, 11(4):336–45, 2002. Available at 22(6):1036–1040, 2020. Available at ‘‘Effect of Nicotine, Low Nicotine, and E-
10.1136/tc.11.4.336. 10.1093/ntr/ntz096. Cigarette Beliefs on Cigarette and E-
* 206. McCandless, P.M., V.B. Yerger, and * 217. Coreas, S.I., E.J. Rodriquez, S.G. Cigarette Use in the US Population and
R.E. Malone. ‘‘Quid Pro Quo: Tobacco Rahman, et al. ‘‘Smoking Susceptibility Cancer Survivors.’’ Journal of Public
Companies and the Black Press.’’ and Tobacco Media Engagement among Health (Berl), 30(4):861–869, 2022.
American Journal of Public Health, Youth Never Smokers.’’ Pediatrics, Available at 10.1007/s10389-020-01361-
102(4):739–50, 2012. Available at 147(6):e2020017921, 2021. Available at 5.
10.2105/ajph.2011.300180. 10.1542/peds.2020-017921. 228. Lin, W., and J.E. Muscat. ‘‘Knowledge
* 207. Berg, C.J., E. Stratton, G.L. Schauer, et * 218. Emory, K., F.O. Buchting, D.R. and Beliefs Regarding Harm from
al. ‘‘Perceived Harm, Addictiveness, and Trinidad, et al. ‘‘Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Specific Tobacco Products: Findings
Social Acceptability of Tobacco Products and Transgender (LGBT) View It from the H.I.N.T. Survey.’’ American
and Marijuana among Young Adults: Differently Than Non-LGBT: Exposure to Journal of Health Promotion, 2021.
Marijuana, Hookah, and Electronic Tobacco-Related Couponing, E-Cigarette Available at 10.1177/
Cigarettes Win.’’ Substance Use and Advertisements, and Anti-Tobacco 08901171211026116.
Misuse, 50(1):79–89, 2015. Available at Messages on Social and Traditional 229. Loud, E.E., H.T. Duong, K.C. Henderson,
10.3109/10826084.2014.958857. Media.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Research, et al. ‘‘Addicted to Smoking or Addicted
208. Gunther, A.C., D. Bolt, D.L.G. 21(4):513–522, 2019. Available at to Nicotine? A Focus Group Study on
Borzekowski, et al. ‘‘Presumed Influence 10.1093/ntr/nty049. Perceptions of Nicotine and Addiction
on Peer Norms: How Mass Media * 219. Henriksen, L., E. Andersen-Rodgers, X. among US Adult Current Smokers,
Indirectly Affect Adolescent Smoking.’’ Zhang, et al. ‘‘Neighborhood Variation in Former Smokers, Non-Smokers and Dual
Journal of Communication, 56(1):52–68, the Price of Cheap Tobacco Products in Users of Cigarettes and E-Cigarettes.’’
2006. Available at 10.1111/j.1460- California: Results from Healthy Stores Addiction, 117:472–481, 2022. Available
2466.2006.00002.x. for a Healthy Community.’’ Nicotine and at 10.1111/add.15634.
209. Wakefield, M., B. Flay, M. Nichter, et al. Tobacco Research, 19(11):1330–1337, * 230. Pacek, L.R., F.J. McClernon, R.L.
‘‘Role of the Media in Influencing 2017. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntx089. Denlinger-Apte, et al. ‘‘Perceived
VerDate Sep<11>2014 22:10 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00097 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5128 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Nicotine Content of Reduced Nicotine Therapy Versus Electronic Cigarettes.’’ Master Settlement Agreement, 1994.
Content Cigarettes Is a Correlate of Health Communication, 36(14):1856– Available at https://
Perceived Health Risks.’’ Tobacco 1866, 2021. Available at 10.1080/ www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/
Control, 27(4):420–426, 2018. Available 10410236.2020.1800288. nyvk0037.
at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2017-053689. 242. Smith, K.H., M.A. Stutts, and G.M. * 252. 22nd Century Group Inc. ‘‘22nd
231. Patel, M., A.F. Cuccia, Y.T. Zhou, et al. Zank. ‘‘An Exploratory Study of the Century Announces the Immediate
‘‘Nicotine Perceptions and Response to Behavior and Perceptions of College Feasibility of the FDA’s Nicotine
Proposed Low-Nicotine Cigarette Students with Respect to Regular, Light, Reduction Plan.’’ July 29, 2018. https://
Policy.’’ Tobacco Regulatory Science, and Ultra Light Cigarettes.’’ Journal of d1io3yog0oux5.cloudfront.net/_
5(6):480–490, 2019. Available at Public Policy & Marketing, 31(2):206– ef8dba87c09978df4eb223a58fef684c/
10.18001/trs.5.6.1. 222, 2012. Available at 10.1509/ xxiicentury/news/2018-07-17_22nd_
* 232. Peterson, E.B., L. Pitzer, and X. Zhao. jppm.09.022. Century_Announces_the_Immediate_
‘‘Disparities in Nicotine Addictiveness * 243. Villanti, A.C., S. Naud, J.C. West, et Feasibility_347.pdf.
and Cancer Harm Perceptions among al. ‘‘Prospective Associations between * 253. National Cancer Institute. Health
U.S. Adults: A Trend Analysis Using the Nicotine Beliefs and Tobacco-Related Effects of Exposure to Environmental
Health Information National Trends Susceptibility, Curiosity, and Use in U.S. Tobacco Smoke. The Report of the
Survey (HINTS).’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Adults.’’ Preventive Medicine, California Environmental Protection
Research, 25(4):639–647, 2022. Available 140:106285, 2020. Available at 10.1016/ Agency. Tobacco Control Monograph No.
at 10.1093/ntr/ntac245. j.ypmed.2020.106285. 10. NIH Pub. No. 99–4645, Bethesda,
233. Snell, L.M., S.M. Colby, T. DeAtley, et * 244. Villanti, A.C., S. Naud, J.C. West, et MD: HHS, National Institutes of Health,
al. ‘‘Associations between Nicotine al. ‘‘Prevalence and Correlates of National Cancer Institute. 1999.
Knowledge and Smoking Cessation Nicotine and Nicotine Product Available at https://cancercontrol.
Behaviors among US Adults Who Perceptions in U.S. Young Adults, cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/monographs/10/
Smoke.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco 2016.’’ Addictive Behaviors, 98:106020, index.html.
Research, 24(6):855–863, 2022. Available 2019. Available at 10.1016/ * 254. National Institute on Drug Abuse.
at 10.1093/ntr/ntab246. j.addbeh.2019.06.009. Notice of Availability of Nicotine
* 234. O’Brien, E.K., M. Roditis, A. Persoskie, * 245. Weiger, C., M.B. Moran, R.D. Kennedy, Research Cigarettes through Nida’s Drug
et al. ‘‘Beliefs and Characteristics
et al. ‘‘Youths’ Perceptions of Nicotine Supply Program. Notice Number NOT–
Associated with Believing Nicotine
Harm and Associations with Product DA–14–004, 2014. Available at https://
Causes Cancer: A Descriptive Analysis to
Use.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Research, grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/
Inform Corrective Message Content and
25(7):1302–1309, 2023. Available at NOT-DA-14-004.html.
Priority Audiences.’’ Nicotine and
10.1093/ntr/ntad028. * 255. Ding, Y.S., P. Richter, B. Hearn, et al.
Tobacco Research, 24(8):1264–1272,
235. Borrelli, B., and S.P. Novak. ‘‘Nurses’ ‘‘Chemical Characterization of
2022. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntac060.
Knowledge About the Risk of Light Mainstream Smoke from Spectrum
* 246. Hackworth, E.E., C.A. Ntansah, K.C.
Cigarettes and Other Tobacco ‘‘Harm Variable Nicotine Research Cigarettes.’’
Henderson, et al. ‘‘‘‘I Crave a Blunt, I
Reduction’’ Strategies.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Regulatory Science, 3(1):81–94,
Don’t Crave a Cigarillo’’: A Focus Group
Tobacco Research, 9(6):653–661, 2007. 2017. Available at 10.18001/trs.3.1.8.
Study on Perceptions of Nicotine and
Available at 10.1080/ * 256. Richter, P., P.R. Steven, R. Bravo, et
Addiction among US Adults Who
14622200701365202. al. ‘‘Characterization of Spectrum
Currently Smoke Little Cigars or
* 236. Denlinger-Apte, R.L., L.R. Pacek, J.C. Variable Nicotine Research Cigarettes.’’
Cigarillos.’’ International Journal of
Ross, et al. ‘‘Risk Perceptions of Low Tobacco Regulatory Science, 2(2):94–
Environmental Research and Public
Nicotine Cigarettes and Alternative 105, 2016. Available at 10.18001/
Health, 20(6):5086, 2023. Available at
Nicotine Products across Priority trs.2.2.1.
10.3390/ijerph20065086.
Smoking Populations.’’ International * 257. 22nd Century Group Inc. 22nd Century
* 247. Levy, D.T., K.M. Cummings, B.W.
Journal of Environmental Research and Group Inc. Modified Risk Tobacco
Heckman, et al. ‘‘The Public Health
Public Health, 18(10):5311, 2021. Gains Had Cigarette Companies Chosen Product (MRTP) Applications. Section IV
Available at 10.3390/ijerph18105311. to Sell Very Low Nicotine Cigarettes.’’ Part 1—Descriptive Information—
* 237. Kaufman, A.R., E.A. Waters, M. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Updated February 22, 2021. HHS, FDA.
Parascandola, et al. ‘‘Food and Drug 23(3):438–446, 2021. Available at 2019. Available at https://www.fda.gov/
Administration Evaluation and Cigarette 10.1093/ntr/ntaa128. tobacco-products/advertising-and-
Smoking Risk Perceptions.’’ American * 248. Djordjevic, M.V., C. Sigountos, K.D. promotion/22nd-century-group-inc-
Journal of Health Behavior, 35(6):766– Brunnemann, et al. ‘‘Tobacco-Specific modified-risk-tobacco-product-mrtp-
776, 2011. Available at 10.5993/ Nitrosamine Delivery in the Mainstream applications.
ajhb.35.6.12. Smoke of High- and Low-Yield Cigarettes * 258. Benowitz, N.L., K.M. Dains, S.M. Hall,
* 238. Kemp, C.B., C.A. Spears, T.F. Smoked with Varying Puff Volume.’’ et al. ‘‘Smoking Behavior and Exposure
Pechacek, et al. ‘‘Adults’ Perceptions of Presented at: CORESTA to Tobacco Toxicants during 6 Months of
Nicotine Harm to Children.’’ Pediatrics, Symposium,1990; Kallithea, Greece. Smoking Progressively Reduced Nicotine
142(2):e20180051, 2018. Available at https://www.coresta.org/abstracts/ Content Cigarettes.’’ Cancer
10.1542/peds.2018-0051. tobacco-specific-nitrosamine-delivery- Epidemiology, Biomarkers and
* 239. Mutti, S., D. Hammond, R. Borland, et mainstream-smoke-high-and-low-yield- Prevention, 21(5):761–9, 2012. Available
al. ‘‘Beyond Light & Mild: Cigarette cigarettes. at 10.1158/1055-9965.epi-11-0644.
Brand Descriptors and Perceptions of 249. Buchhalter, A.R., M.C. Acosta, SE Evans, 259. Benowitz, N.L., P. Jacob, 3rd, and B.
Risk in the International Tobacco Control et al. ‘‘Tobacco Abstinence Symptom Herrera. ‘‘Nicotine Intake and Dose
(ITC) Four Country Survey.’’ Addiction, Suppression: The Role Played by the Response When Smoking Reduced-
106(6):1166–1175, 2011. Available at Smoking-Related Stimuli That Are Nicotine Content Cigarettes.’’ Clinical
10.1111/j.1360-0443.2011.03402.x. Delivered by Denicotinized Cigarettes.’’ Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
240. Patel, D., N. Peiper, and B. Rodu. Addiction, 100(4):550–9, 2005. Available 80(6):703–14, 2006. Available at
‘‘Perceptions of the Health Risks Related at 10.1111/j.1360-0443.2005.01030.x. 10.1016/j.clpt.2006.09.007.
to Cigarettes and Nicotine among 250. Pickworth, W.B., R.V. Fant, R.A. Nelson, * 260. Nguyen, A.B., X. Zhao, L. Hoffman, et
University Faculty.’’ Addiction Research et al. ‘‘Pharmacodynamic Effects of New al. ‘‘Nicotine and Addiction Beliefs and
& Theory, 21(2):154–159, 2013. De-Nicotinized Cigarettes.’’ Nicotine and Perceptions among the US-Born and
Available at 10.3109/ Tobacco Research, 1(4):357–64, 1999. Foreign-Born Populations.’’ Preventive
16066359.2012.703268. Available at 10.1080/ Medicine, 114:107–114, 2018. Available
* 241. Shi, R., R. Feldman, J.Y. Liu, et al. 14622299050011491. at 10.1016/j.ypmed.2018.06.018.
‘‘The Dilemma of Correcting Nicotine * 251. Philip Morris USA. Alkaloid Reduced * 261. O’Brien, E.K., A.B. Nguyen, A.
Misperceptions: Nicotine Replacement Tobacco (ART) Program. Product Design; Persoskie, et al. ‘‘U.S. Adults’ Addiction
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00098 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5129
and Harm Beliefs About Nicotine and Highlights. CDC, Office of Smoking and Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental
Low Nicotine Cigarettes.’’ Preventive Health. 2024. Available at https:// Research, 43(1):79–90, 2019. Available at
Medicine, 96:94–100, 2017. Available at www.cdc.gov/tobacco/media/pdfs/2024/ 10.1111/acer.13922.
10.1016/j.ypmed.2016.12.048. 09/cdc-osh-ncis-data-report-508.pdf. * 284. Weinberger, A.H., J.M. Streck, L.R.
* 262. Popova, L., D. Owusu, A.L. Nyman, et * 273. Jamal, A., B.A. King, L.J. Neff, et al. Pacek, et al. ‘‘Nondaily Cigarette
al. ‘‘Effects of Framing Nicotine ‘‘Current Cigarette Smoking among Smoking Is Increasing among People
Reduction in Cigarettes on Anticipated Adults—United States, 2005–2015.’’ with Common Mental Health and
Tobacco Product Use Intentions and Risk MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Substance Use Problems in the United
Perceptions among US Adult Smokers.’’ Report, 65(44):1205–1211, 2016. States: Data from Representative Samples
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Available at 10.15585/mmwr.mm6544a2. of US Adults, 2005–2014.’’ Journal of
21(Suppl 1):S108-s116, 2019. Available * 274. Cornelius, M.E., C.G. Loretan, A. Clinical Psychiatry, 79(5):17m11945,
at 10.1093/ntr/ntz146. Jamal, et al. ‘‘Tobacco Product Use 2018. Available at 10.4088/
* 263. Denlinger-Apte, R.L., J.W. Tidey, J.S. among Adults—United States, 2021.’’ JCP.17m11945.
Koopmeiners, et al. ‘‘Correlates of MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly * 285. Johnston, L.D., R.A. Miech, P.M.
Support for a Nicotine-Reduction Policy Report, 72(18):475–483, 2023. Available O’Malley, et al. Monitoring the Future
in Smokers with 6-Week Exposure to at 10.15585/mmwr.mm7218a1. National Survey Results on Drug Use,
Very Low Nicotine Cigarettes.’’ Tobacco * 275. Gentzke, A.S., T.W. Wang, A. Jamal, 1975–2021; 2021 Overview: Key Findings
Control, 28(3):352–355, 2019. Available et al. ‘‘Tobacco Product Use among on Adolescent Drug Use. Ann Arbor, MI:
at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2018-054622. Middle and High School Students— University of Michigan, Institute for
* 264. Denlinger-Apte, R.L., C.M. White, E.C. United States, 2020.’’ MMWR Morbidity Social Research, 2022. Available at
Donny, et al. ‘‘‘‘I Actually Finally Feel and Mortality Weekly Report, https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/
Like the Cigarettes Aren’t Controlling 69(50):1881–1888, 2020. Available at bitstream/handle/2027.42/171751/mtf-
Me.’’—Interviews with Participants 10.15585/mmwr.mm6950a1. overview2021.pdf?sequence=1.
Smoking Very Low Nicotine Content * 276. Schuler, M.S., D.M. Prince, J. Breslau, * 286. Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Cigarettes during a Residential Study.’’ et al. ‘‘Substance Use Disparities at the Services Administration. Key Substance
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, Intersection of Sexual Identity and Race/ Use and Mental Health Indicators in the
219:108465, 2021. Available at 10.1016/ Ethnicity: Results from the 2015–2018 United States: Results from the 2019
j.drugalcdep.2020.108465. National Survey on Drug Use and National Survey on Drug Use and
* 265. Hatsukami, D.K., S.J. Heishman, R.I. Health.’’ LGBT Health, 7(6):283–291, Health. Rockville, MD: SAMHSA, Center
Vogel, et al. ‘‘Dose-Response Effects of 2020. Available at 10.1089/ for Behavioral Health Statistics and
Spectrum Research Cigarettes.’’ Nicotine lgbt.2019.0352. Quality. 2020. Available at https://store.
and Tobacco Research, 15(6):1113–21, * 277. Schuler, M.S., B.D. Stein, and R.L. samhsa.gov/product/results-2019-
2013. Available at 10.1093/ntr/nts247. Collins. ‘‘Differences in Substance Use national-survey-drug-use-and-health-
* 266. Benhamou, E., S. Benhamou, A. Disparities across Age Groups in a nsduh-key-substance-use-and-mental-
Auquier, et al. ‘‘Changes in Patterns of National Cross-Sectional Survey of health.
Cigarette Smoking and Lung Cancer Risk: Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Adults.’’ * 287. Wang, T.W., A. Gentzke, S. Sharapova,
Results of a Case-Control Study.’’ British LGBT Health, 6(2):68–76, 2019. et al. ‘‘Tobacco Product Use among
Journal of Cancer, 60(4):601–4, 1989. Available at 10.1089/lgbt.2018.0125. Middle and High School Students—
Available at 10.1038/bjc.1989.322. * 278. Park-Lee, E., C. Ren, M. Cooper, et al. United States, 2011–2017.’’ MMWR
* 267. Byron, M.J., M. Jeong, D.B. Abrams, et ‘‘Tobacco Product Use among Middle Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
al. ‘‘Public Misperception That Very Low and High School Students—United 67(22):629–633, 2018. Available at
Nicotine Cigarettes Are Less States, 2022.’’ MMWR Morbidity and 10.15585/mmwr.mm6722a3.
Carcinogenic.’’ Tobacco Control, Mortality Weekly Report, 71(45):1429– 288. Johnson, SE, E.K. O’Brien, B. Coleman,
27(6):712–714, 2018. Available at 1435, 2022. Available at 10.15585/ et al. ‘‘Sexual and Gender Minority U.S.
10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2017-054124. mmwr.mm7145a1. Youth Tobacco Use: Population
* 268. Mercincavage, M., K. Lochbuehler, * 279. Ganz, O., and C.D. Delnevo. ‘‘Cigarette Assessment of Tobacco and Health
A.C. Villanti, et al. ‘‘Examining Risk Smoking and the Role of Menthol in (PATH) Study Wave 3, 2015–2016.’’
Perceptions among Daily Smokers Na¨ıve Tobacco Use Inequalities for Sexual American Journal of Preventive
to Reduced Nicotine Content Cigarettes.’’ Minorities.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Medicine, 57(2):256–261, 2019.
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Research, 23(11):1942–1946, 2021. Available at 10.1016/
21(7):985–990, 2019. Available at Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntab101. j.amepre.2019.03.021.
10.1093/ntr/nty082. 280. Casetta, B., A.J. Videla, A. Bardach, et * 289. Senders, A., and W. Horner-Johnson.
269. Ali, FRM., M. Al-Shawaf, T.W. Wang, et al. ‘‘Association between Cigarette ‘‘Disparities in E-Cigarette and Tobacco
al. ‘‘U.S. Adults’ Attitudes toward Smoking Prevalence and Income Level: Use among Adolescents with
Lowering Nicotine Levels in Cigarettes.’’ A Systematic Review and Meta- Disabilities.’’ Preventing Chronic
American Journal of Preventive Analysis.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Disease, 17:E135, 2020. Available at
Medicine, 57(3):403–407, 2019. Research, 19(12):1401–1407, 2016. 10.5888/pcd17.200161.
Available at 10.1016/ Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntw266. * 290. Corey, C.G., B.A. King, B.N. Coleman,
j.amepre.2019.04.016. * 281. Cornelius, M.E., C.G. Loretan, T.W. et al. ‘‘Little Filtered Cigar, Cigarillo, and
270. Henderson, K.C., E.E. Loud, H.T. Duong, Wang, et al. ‘‘Tobacco Product Use Premium Cigar Smoking among Adults—
et al. ‘‘Perceptions of Nicotine Reduction among Adults—United States, 2020.’’ United States, 2012–2013.’’ MMWR
Policy in the US: A Qualitative Study.’’ MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Report, 71(11):397–405, 2022. Available 63(30):650–4, 2014. Available at https://
24(9):1422–1429, 2022. Available at at 10.15585/mmwr.mm7111a1. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
10.1093/ntr/ntac071. * 282. Pacek, L.R., J. Copeland, L. Dierker, et PMC4584787/pdf/650-654.pdf.
* 271. Ntansah, C.A., E.E. Hackworth, K.C. al. ‘‘Among Whom Is Cigarette Smoking * 291. National Addiction & HIV Data
Henderson, et al. ‘‘Reactions to Messages Declining in the United States? The Archive Program. ‘‘PATH Study Data
About a Nicotine Reduction Policy: A Impact of Cannabis Use Status, 2002– Tables and Figures: Waves 1–5 (2013–
Focus Group Study among People Who 2015.’’ Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 2019).’’ icpsr.umich.edu. https://
Use Little Cigars and Cigarillos.’’ 191:355–360, 2018. Available at 10.1016/ www.icpsr.umich.edu/web/pages/
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, j.drugalcdep.2018.01.040. NAHDAP/path-study-tables.html.
26(1):87–93, 2024. Available at 10.1093/ * 283. Weinberger, A.H., L.R. Pacek, D. * 292. Agaku, I.T., B.A. King, C.G. Husten, et
ntr/ntad155. Giovenco, et al. ‘‘Cigarette Use among al. ‘‘Tobacco Product Use among
* 272. CDC. Tobacco Product Use among Individuals with Alcohol Use Disorders Adults—United States, 2012–2013.’’
Adults—United States, 2022. 2022 in the United States, 2002 to 2016: MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) Trends Overall and by Race/Ethnicity.’’ Report, 63(25):542–7, 2014. Available at
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00099 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5130 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ * 305. Blank, M.D., A. Nasim, A. Hart, Jr., et 70(3):679–82, 1992. Available at
articles/PMC5779380/pdf/542-547.pdf. al. ‘‘Acute Effects of Cigarillo Smoking.’’ 10.1002/1097-
* 293. Emory, K., Y. Kim, F. Buchting, et al. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 0142(19920801)70:3<679::aid-
‘‘Intragroup Variance in Lesbian, Gay, 13(9):874–9, 2011. Available at 10.1093/ cncr2820700323>3.0.co;2-z.
and Bisexual Tobacco Use Behaviors: ntr/ntr070. * 316. Engeland, A., T. Haldorsen, A.
Evidence That Subgroups Matter, * 306. Koszowski, B., Z.R. Rosenberry, A. Andersen, et al. ‘‘The Impact of Smoking
Notably Bisexual Women.’’ Nicotine and Kanu, et al. ‘‘Nicotine and Carbon Habits on Lung Cancer Risk: 28 Years’
Tobacco Research, 18(6):1494–501, 2016. Monoxide Exposure from Inhalation of Observation of 26,000 Norwegian Men
Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntv208. Cigarillo Smoke.’’ Pharmacology and Women.’’ Cancer Causes and
* 294. Johnson, SE, E. Holder-Hayes, G.K. Biochemistry and Behavior, 139(Pt A):7– Control, 7(3):366–76, 1996. Available at
Tessman, et al. ‘‘Tobacco Product Use 14, 2015. Available at 10.1016/ 10.1007/bf00052943.
among Sexual Minority Adults: Findings j.pbb.2015.10.007. * 317. Shahab, L., R. West, and A. McNeill.
from the 2012–2013 National Adult 307. Pickworth, W.B., Z.R. Rosenberry, and ‘‘A Comparison of Exposure to
Tobacco Survey.’’ American Journal of B. Koszowski. ‘‘Toxicant Exposure from Carcinogens among Roll-Your-Own and
Preventive Medicine, 50(4):e91–e100, Smoking a Little Cigar: Further Support Factory-Made Cigarette Smokers.’’
2016. Available at 10.1016/ for Product Regulation.’’ Tobacco Addiction Biology, 14(3):315–20, 2009.
j.amepre.2015.07.041. Control, 26(3):269–276, 2017. Available Available at 10.1111/j.1369-
* 295. Rath, J.M., A.C. Villanti, R.A. at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2015-052633. 1600.2009.00157.x.
Rubenstein, et al. ‘‘Tobacco Use by * 308. Rosenberry, Z.R., W.B. Pickworth, and 318. Tuyns, A.J., and J. Esteve. ‘‘Pipe,
Sexual Identity among Young Adults in B. Koszowski. ‘‘Large Cigars: Smoking Commercial and Hand-Rolled Cigarette
the United States.’’ Nicotine and Topography and Toxicant Exposure.’’ Smoking in Oesophageal Cancer.’’
Tobacco Research, 15(11):1822–31, 2013. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, International Journal of Epidemiology,
Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntt062. 20(2):183–191, 2018. Available at 12(1):110–3, 1983. Available at 10.1093/
* 296. Wheldon, C.W., and K.P. Wiseman. 10.1093/ntr/ntw289. ije/12.1.110.
‘‘Tobacco Use among Transgender and * 309. Rostron, B.L., M.J. Schroeder, and B.K. * 319. Young, D., H.H. Yong, R. Borland, et
Gender Non-Conforming Adults in the Ambrose. ‘‘Dependence Symptoms and al. ‘‘Trends in Roll-Your-Own Smoking:
United States.’’ Tobacco Use Insights, Cessation Intentions among US Adult Findings from the ITC Four-Country
12:1179173x19849419, 2019. Available Survey (2002–2008).’’ Journal of
Daily Cigarette, Cigar, and E-Cigarette
at 10.1177/1179173x19849419. Environmental and Public Health,
Users, 2012–2013.’’ BMC Public Health,
297. Caruso, R.V., R.J. O’Connor, M.J. 2012:406283, 2012. Available at 10.1155/
16(1):814, 2016. Available at 10.1186/
Travers, et al. ‘‘Design Characteristics 2012/406283.
s12889-016-3510-2.
and Tobacco Metal Concentrations in * 320. Tworek, C., G.L. Schauer, C.C. Wu, et
* 310. Strong, D.R., K. Messer, S.J. Hartman,
Filtered Cigars.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco al. ‘‘Youth Tobacco Cessation: Quitting
et al. ‘‘Measurement of Multiple Nicotine
Research, 17(11):1331–6, 2015. Available Intentions and Past-Year Quit Attempts.’’
Dependence Domains among Cigarette,
at 10.1093/ntr/ntu341. American Journal of Preventive
Non-Cigarette and Poly-Tobacco Users:
* 298. Delnevo, C.D., and M. Hrywna. ‘‘‘‘A Medicine, 47(2 Suppl 1):S15–27, 2014.
Insights from Item Response Theory.’’
Whole ’Nother Smoke’’ or a Cigarette in Available at 10.1016/
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 152:185–
Disguise: How Rj Reynolds Reframed the j.amepre.2014.05.009.
93, 2015. Available at 10.1016/
Image of Little Cigars.’’ American Journal * 321. Malhotra, J., C. Borron, N.D.
j.drugalcdep.2015.03.040.
of Public Health, 97(8):1368–75, 2007. Freedman, et al. ‘‘Association between
311. Strong, D.R., J. Pearson, S. Ehlke, et al.
Available at 10.2105/ajph.2006.101063. Cigar or Pipe Smoking and Cancer Risk
‘‘Indicators of Dependence for Different
* 299. Nasim, A., M.D. Blank, B.M. Berry, et in Men: A Pooled Analysis of Five
Types of Tobacco Product Users:
al. ‘‘Cigar Use Misreporting among Cohort Studies.’’ Cancer Prevention
Descriptive Findings from Wave 1
Youth: Data from the 2009 Youth Research, 10(12):704–709, 2017.
(2013–2014) of the Population
Tobacco Survey, Virginia.’’ Preventing Available at 10.1158/1940-6207.Capr-17-
Assessment of Tobacco and Health
Chronic Disease, 9:E42, 2012. Available 0084.
at 10.5888/pcd9.110084. (PATH) Study.’’ Drug and Alcohol * 322. Morris, D.S., and M.A. Tynan. ‘‘Fiscal
300. Terchek, J.J., E.M. Larkin, M.L. Male, et Dependence, 178:257–266, 2017. and Policy Implications of Selling Pipe
al. ‘‘Measuring Cigar Use in Adolescents: Available at 10.1016/ Tobacco for Roll-Your-Own Cigarettes in
Inclusion of a Brand-Specific Item.’’ j.drugalcdep.2017.05.010. the United States.’’ PloS One,
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, * 312. Joseph, S., N.M. Krebs, J. Zhu, et al. 7(5):e36487, 2012. Available at 10.1371/
11(7):842–6, 2009. Available at 10.1093/ ‘‘Differences in Nicotine Dependence, journal.pone.0036487.
ntr/ntp074. Smoke Exposure and Consumer * 323. Gottlieb, S., and M. Zeller. ‘‘A
* 301. Trapl, E.S., J.J. Terchek, L. Danosky, Characteristics between Smokers of Nicotine-Focused Framework for Public
et al. ‘‘Complexity of Measuring ‘‘Cigar Machine-Injected Roll-Your-Own Health.’’ New England Journal of
Use’’ in Adolescents: Results from a Split Cigarettes and Factory-Made Cigarettes.’’ Medicine, 377(12):1111–1114, 2017.
Sample Experiment.’’ Nicotine and Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 187:109– Available at 10.1056/NEJMp1707409.
Tobacco Research, 13(4):291–5, 2011. 115, 2018. Available at 10.1016/ * 324. Nutt, D.J., L.D. Phillips, D. Balfour, et
Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntq247. j.drugalcdep.2018.01.039. al. ‘‘Estimating the Harms of Nicotine-
302. Henningfield, J.E., R.V. Fant, A. Radzius, * 313. Koszowski, B., Z.R. Rosenberry, L.C. Containing Products Using the MCDA
et al. ‘‘Nicotine Concentration, Smoke Viray, et al. ‘‘Make Your Own Cigarettes: Approach.’’ European Addiction
pH and Whole Tobacco Aqueous pH of Toxicant Exposure, Smoking Research, 20(5):218–25, 2014. Available
Some Cigar Brands and Types Popular in Topography, and Subjective Effects.’’ at 10.1159/000360220.
the United States.’’ Nicotine and Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and * 325. Persoskie, A., and E.K. O’Brien.
Tobacco Research, 1(2):163–8, 1999. Prevention, 23(9):1793–803, 2014. ‘‘Predicting Tobacco Product Initiation
Available at 10.1080/ Available at 10.1158/1055-9965.epi-14- from Intentions to Use: Comparing the
14622299050011271. 0280. Validity of Item Analysis Methods.’’
303. Henningfield, J.E., M. Hariharan, and 314. Shahab, L., R. West, and A. McNeill. Preventive Medicine Reports, 28:101855,
L.T. Kozlowski. ‘‘Nicotine Content and ‘‘The Feasibility of Measuring Puffing 2022. Available at 10.1016/
Health Risks of Cigars.’’ JAMA, Behaviour in Roll-Your-Own Cigarette j.pmedr.2022.101855.
276(23):1857–8, 1996. Available at Smokers.’’ Tobacco Control, 17 Suppl 326. Webb, T.L., and P. Sheeran. ‘‘Does
10.1001/jama.1996.03540230007003. 1:i17–23, 2008. Available at 10.1136/ Changing Behavioral Intentions
* 304. Blank, M.D., C.O. Cobb, T. Eissenberg, tc.2007.021824. Engender Behavior Change? A Meta-
et al. ‘‘Acute Effects of ‘‘Hyping’’ a * 315. De Stefani, E., F. Oreggia, S. Rivero, Analysis of the Experimental Evidence.’’
Black&Mild Cigarillo.’’ Nicotine and et al. ‘‘Hand-Rolled Cigarette Smoking Psychological Bulletin, 132(2):249–68,
Tobacco Research, 18(4):460–9, 2016. and Risk of Cancer of the Mouth, 2006. Available at 10.1037/0033-
Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntv063. Pharynx, and Larynx.’’ Cancer, 2909.132.2.249.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00100 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5131
*327. Benowitz, N.L., N. Nardone, D.K. 338.Agaku, I.T., and H.R. Alpert. ‘‘Trends in Marketplace I: Substitutability as a
Hatsukami, et al. ‘‘Biochemical Annual Sales and Current Use of Function of the Price of Conventional
Estimation of Noncompliance with Cigarettes, Cigars, Roll-Your-Own Cigarettes.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco
Smoking of Very Low Nicotine Content Tobacco, Pipes, and Smokeless Tobacco Research, 18(7):1642–8, 2016. Available
Cigarettes.’’ Cancer Epidemiology, among US Adults, 2002–2012.’’ Tobacco at 10.1093/ntr/ntv230.
Biomarkers and Prevention, 24(2):331– Control, 25(4):451–7, 2016. Available at *350. National Cancer Institute. Risks
335, 2015. Available at 10.1158/1055- 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2014-052125. Associated with Smoking Cigarettes with
9965.EPI-14-1040. 339.Tynan, M.A., D. Morris, and T. Weston. Low Machine-Measured Yields of Tar
*328. Foulds, J., A. Hobkirk, E. Wasserman, ‘‘Continued Implications of Taxing Roll- and Nicotine. Tobacco Control
et al. ‘‘Estimation of Compliance with Your-Own Tobacco as Pipe Tobacco in Monograph No. 13. NIH Pub. No. 02–
Exclusive Smoking of Very Low Nicotine the USA.’’ Tobacco Control, 24(e2):e125– 5047, Bethesda, MD: HHS, National
Content Cigarettes Using Plasma 7, 2015. Available at 10.1136/ Institutes of Health, National Cancer
Cotinine.’’ Preventive Medicine, 117:24– tobaccocontrol-2013-051531. Institute. 2001. Available at https://
29, 2018. Available at 10.1016/ *340. Wang, T.W., B. Kenemer, M.A. Tynan, cancercontrol.cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/
j.ypmed.2018.04.011. et al. ‘‘Consumption of Combustible and monographs/monograph-13.
*329. Hammond, D., and R.J. O’Connor. Smokeless Tobacco—United States, 351.Scherer, G. ‘‘Smoking Behaviour and
‘‘Reduced Nicotine Cigarettes: Smoking 2000–2015.’’ MMWR Morbidity and Compensation: A Review of the
Behavior and Biomarkers of Exposure Mortality Weekly Report, 65(48):1357– Literature.’’ Psychopharmacology
among Smokers Not Intending to Quit.’’ 1363, 2016. Available at 10.15585/ (Berlin), 145(1):1–20, 1999. Available at
Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and mmwr.mm6548a1. 10.1007/s002130051027.
Prevention, 23(10):2032–40, 2014. *341. Hursh, S.R. ‘‘Behavioral Economics.’’ 352.Adams, J.D., S.J. Lee, N. Vinchkoski, et
Available at 10.1158/1055-9965.epi-13- Journal of the Experimental Analysis of al. ‘‘On the Formation of the Tobacco-
0957. Behavior, 42(3):435–52, 1984. Available Specific Carcinogen 4-
*330. Nardone, N., E.C. Donny, D.K. at 10.1901/jeab.1984.42-435. (Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-Pyridyl)-1-
Hatsukami, et al. ‘‘Estimations and 342.MacKillop, J., J.G. Murphy, L.A. Ray, et Butanone during Smoking.’’ Cancer
Predictors of Non-Compliance in al. ‘‘Further Validation of a Cigarette Letters, 17(3):339–46, 1983. Available at
Switchers to Reduced Nicotine Content Purchase Task for Assessing the Relative 10.1016/0304-3835(83)90173-8.
Cigarettes.’’ Addiction, 111(12):2208– Reinforcing Efficacy of Nicotine in 353.Augustine, A., R.E. Harris, and E.L.
2216, 2016. Available at 10.1111/ College Smokers.’’ Experimental and Wynder. ‘‘Compensation as a Risk Factor
add.13519. Clinical Psychopharmacology, 16(1):57– for Lung Cancer in Smokers Who Switch
*331. Smith, T.T., E.C. Donny, X. Luo, et al. 65, 2008. Available at 10.1037/1064- from Nonfilter to Filter Cigarettes.’’
‘‘The Impact of Gradual and Immediate 1297.16.1.57. American Journal of Public Health,
Nicotine Reduction on Subjective *343. Smith, T.T., R.N. Cassidy, J.W. Tidey, 79(2):188–91, 1989. Available at
Cigarette Ratings.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco et al. ‘‘Impact of Smoking Reduced 10.2105/ajph.79.2.188.
Research, 21(Suppl 1):S73-s80, 2019. Nicotine Content Cigarettes on 354.Benowitz, N.L., S.M. Hall, R.I. Herning,
Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntz158. Sensitivity to Cigarette Price: Further et al. ‘‘Smokers of Low-Yield Cigarettes
*332. Smith, T.T., A.F. Sved, D.K. Results from a Multi-Site Clinical Trial.’’ Do Not Consume Less Nicotine.’’ New
Hatsukami, et al. ‘‘Nicotine Reduction as Addiction, 112(2):349–359, 2017. England Journal of Medicine,
an Increase in the Unit Price of Available at 10.1111/add.13636. 309(3):139–42, 1983. Available at
Cigarettes: A Behavioral Economics *344. Wilson, A.G., C.T. Franck, M.N. 10.1056/nejm198307213090303.
Approach.’’ Preventive Medicine, 68:23– Koffarnus, et al. ‘‘Behavioral Economics 355.Coultas, D.B., C.A. Stidley, and J.M.
8, 2014. Available at 10.1016/ of Cigarette Purchase Tasks: Within- Samet. ‘‘Cigarette Yields of Tar and
j.ypmed.2014.07.005. Subject Comparison of Real, Potentially Nicotine and Markers of Exposure to
*333. Chaloupka, F.J., K. Straif, and M.E. Real, and Hypothetical Cigarettes.’’ Tobacco Smoke.’’ American Review of
Leon. ‘‘Effectiveness of Tax and Price Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Respiratory Disease, 148(2):435–40,
Policies in Tobacco Control.’’ Tobacco 18(5):524–30, 2016. Available at 1993. Available at 10.1164/ajrccm/
Control, 20(3):235–8, 2011. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntv154. 148.2.435.
10.1136/tc.2010.039982. *345. Gammon, D.G., B.R. Loomis, D.L. 356.Djordjevic, M.V., S.D. Stellman, and E.
*334. Betzner, A., R.G. Boyle, and A.W. St Dench, et al. ‘‘Effect of Price Changes in Zang. ‘‘Doses of Nicotine and Lung
Claire. ‘‘Price-Minimizing Behaviors in a Little Cigars and Cigarettes on Little Carcinogens Delivered to Cigarette
Cohort of Smokers before and after a Cigar Sales: USA, Q4 2011–Q4 2013.’’ Smokers.’’ Journal of the National
Cigarette Tax Increase.’’ International Tobacco Control, 25(5):538–44, 2016. Cancer Institute, 92(2):106–11, 2000.
Journal of Environmental Research and Available at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol- Available at 10.1093/jnci/92.2.106.
Public Health, 13(6):608, 2016. Available 2015-052343. 357.Jarvis, M.J., R. Boreham, P. Primatesta,
at 10.3390/ijerph13060608. *346. Huang, J., C. Gwarnicki, X. Xu, et al. et al. ‘‘Nicotine Yield from Machine-
*335. Licht, A.S., A.J. Hyland, R.J. O’Connor, ‘‘A Comprehensive Examination of Own- Smoked Cigarettes and Nicotine Intakes
et al. ‘‘Socio-Economic Variation in Price and Cross-Price Elasticities of Tobacco in Smokers: Evidence from a
Minimizing Behaviors: Findings from the and Nicotine Replacement Products in Representative Population Survey.’’
International Tobacco Control (ITC) Four the U.S.’’ Preventive Medicine, 117:107– Journal of the National Cancer Institute,
Country Survey.’’ International Journal 114, 2018. Available at 10.1016/ 93(2):134–8, 2001. Available at 10.1093/
of Environmental Research and Public j.ypmed.2018.04.024. jnci/93.2.134.
Health, 8(1):234–52, 2011. Available at 347.Zheng, Y., C. Zhen, D. Dench, et al. *358. Long, L.L. ‘‘Summary of Results on
10.3390/ijerph8010234. ‘‘U.S. Demand for Tobacco Products in a Ventilated Cigarettes Ness Motley Law
336.Delnevo, C.D., M. Hrywna, J. Foulds, et System Framework.’’ Health Economics, Firm. (Vol. Bates No. 1001900842).’’
al. ‘‘Cigar Use before and after a Cigarette 26(8):1067–1086, 2017. Available at 1995. Available at http://
Excise Tax Increase in New Jersey.’’ 10.1002/hec.3384. industrydocuments.library.ucsf.edu/
Addictive Behaviors, 29(9):1799–807, *348. Heckman, B.W., K.M. Cummings, A.A. tobacco/docs/nrjd0040.
2004. Available at 10.1016/ Hirsch, et al. ‘‘A Novel Method for *359. National Cancer Institute. The FTC
j.addbeh.2004.04.024. Evaluating the Acceptability of Cigarette Test Method for Detemining
*337. Jo, C.L., J.W. Ayers, B.M. Althouse, et Substitutes for Cigarettes: The Tar, Nicotine, and Carbon Monoxide
al. ‘‘US Consumer Interest in Non- Experimental Tobacco Marketplace.’’ Yields of U.S. Cigarettes. Report of the
Cigarette Tobacco Products Spikes Tobacco Regulatory Science, 3(3):266– NCI Expert Committee. Tobacco Control
around the 2009 Federal Tobacco Tax 279, 2017. Available at 10.18001/ Monograph No. 7. NIH Pub. No. 96–
Increase.’’ Tobacco Control, 24(4):395–9, trs.3.3.3. 4028, Bethesda, MD: HHS, National
2015. Available at 10.1136/ *349. Quisenberry, A.J., M.N. Koffarnus, L.E. Institutes of Health, National Cancer
tobaccocontrol-2013-051261. Hatz, et al. ‘‘The Experimental Tobacco Institute. 1996. Available at https://
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00101 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5132 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
cancercontrol.cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/ Smoking Cessation.’’ Tobacco Control, Related Outcomes One Month after an
monographs/monograph-07. 24(6):536–9, 2015. Available at 10.1136/ Immediate Versus Gradual Reduction in
360. O’Connor, R.J., D. Hammond, A. tobaccocontrol-2014-051797. Nicotine Content of Cigarettes.’’
McNeill, et al. ‘‘How Do Different 371. McRobbie, H., D. Przulj, K.M. Smith, et Preventive Medicine, 165(Pt B):107175,
Cigarette Design Features Influence the al. ‘‘Complementing the Standard 2022. Available at 10.1016/
Standard Tar Yields of Popular Cigarette Multicomponent Treatment for Smokers j.ypmed.2022.107175.
Brands Sold in Different Countries?’’ with Denicotinized Cigarettes: A * 381. Bandiera, F.C., K.C. Ross, S. Taghavi,
Tobacco Control, 17 Suppl 1:i1–5, 2008. Randomized Trial.’’ Nicotine and et al. ‘‘Nicotine Dependence, Nicotine
Available at 10.1136/tc.2006.019166. Tobacco Research, 18(5):1134–41, 2016. Metabolism, and the Extent of
* 361. Thun, M.J., and D.M. Burns. ‘‘Health Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntv122. Compensation in Response to Reduced
Impact of ‘‘Reduced Yield’’ Cigarettes: A 372. Rezaishiraz, H., A. Hyland, M.C. Nicotine Content Cigarettes.’’ Nicotine
Critical Assessment of the Mahoney, et al. ‘‘Treating Smokers and Tobacco Research, 17(9):1167–72,
Epidemiological Evidence.’’ Tobacco before the Quit Date: Can Nicotine 2015. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntu337.
Control, 10 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):i4–11, Patches and Denicotinized Cigarettes * 382. Ding, Y.S., J. Ward, D. Hammond, et
2001. Available at 10.1136/tc.10.suppl_ Reduce Cravings?’’ Nicotine and al. ‘‘Mouth-Level Intake of
1.i4. Tobacco Research, 9(11):1139–46, 2007. Benzo[a]Pyrene from Reduced Nicotine
362. Byrd, G.D., R.A. Davis, W.S. Caldwell, Available at 10.1080/ Cigarettes.’’ International Journal of
et al. ‘‘A Further Study of FTC Yield and 14622200701684172. Environmental Research and Public
Nicotine Absorption in Smokers.’’ 373. Walker, N., C. Howe, C. Bullen, et al. Health, 11(11):11898–914, 2014.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), ‘‘The Combined Effect of Very Low Available at 10.3390/ijerph111111898.
139(4):291–9, 1998. Available at Nicotine Content Cigarettes, Used as an * 383. Donny, E.C., and M. Jones. ‘‘Prolonged
10.1007/s002130050720. Adjunct to Usual Quitline Care (Nicotine Exposure to Denicotinized Cigarettes
363. Byrd, G.D., J.H. Robinson, W.S. Replacement Therapy and Behavioural with or without Transdermal Nicotine.’’
Caldwell, et al. ‘‘Comparison of Support), on Smoking Cessation: A Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 104(1–
Measured and FTC-Predicted Nicotine Randomized Controlled Trial.’’ 2):23–33, 2009. Available at 10.1016/
Uptake in Smokers.’’ Addiction, 107(10):1857–67, 2012. j.drugalcdep.2009.01.021.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 122(2):95– Available at 10.1111/j.1360- * 384. Mercincavage, M., V. Souprountchouk,
0443.2012.03906.x.
103, 1995. Available at 10.1007/ K.Z. Tang, et al. ‘‘A Randomized
* 374. Benowitz, N.L., N. Nardone, K.M.
bf02246082. Controlled Trial of Progressively
Dains, et al. ‘‘Effect of Reducing the
364. Hammond, D., G.T. Fong, K.M. Reduced Nicotine Content Cigarettes on
Nicotine Content of Cigarettes on
Cummings, et al. ‘‘Cigarette Yields and Smoking Behaviors, Biomarkers of
Cigarette Smoking Behavior and Tobacco
Human Exposure: A Comparison of Exposure, and Subjective Ratings.’’
Smoke Toxicant Exposure: 2-Year
Alternative Testing Regimens.’’ Cancer Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and
Follow Up.’’ Addiction, 110(10):1667–
Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention, 25(7):1125–33, 2016.
75, 2015. Available at 10.1111/
Prevention, 15(8):1495–501, 2006. Available at 10.1158/1055-9965.epi-15-
add.12978.
Available at 10.1158/1055-9965.Epi-06- 1088.
* 375. Klemperer, E.M., J.R. Hughes, and
0047. * 385. Rose, J.E., F.M. Behm, C. Ramsey, et
P.W. Callas. ‘‘Increasing Quit Attempts
* 365. Song, M.A., N.L. Benowitz, M. al. ‘‘Platelet Monoamine Oxidase,
by Transitioning to Very Low Nicotine
Berman, et al. ‘‘Cigarette Filter Smoking Cessation, and Tobacco
Content Cigarettes Versus Reducing
Ventilation and Its Relationship to Withdrawal Symptoms.’’ Nicotine and
Number of Cigarettes Per Day: A
Increasing Rates of Lung Tobacco Research, 3(4):383–90, 2001.
Secondary Analysis of an Exploratory
Adenocarcinoma.’’ Journal of the Available at 10.1080/
Randomized Trial.’’ Nicotine and
National Cancer Institute, 14622200110087277.
Tobacco Research, 21(Suppl 1):S81–s87,
109(12):djx075, 2017. Available at * 386. Dermody, S.S., J.W. Tidey, R.L.
2019. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntz145.
10.1093/jnci/djx075. Denlinger, et al. ‘‘The Impact of Smoking
* 376. Smith, T.T., J.S. Koopmeiners, K.M.
366. Watson, C.H., J.S. Trommel, and D.L. Tessier, et al. ‘‘Randomized Trial of Low- Very Low Nicotine Content Cigarettes on
Ashley. ‘‘Solid-Phase Microextraction- Nicotine Cigarettes and Transdermal Alcohol Use.’’ Alcoholism, Clinical and
Based Approach to Determine Free-Base Nicotine.’’ American Journal of Experimental Research, 40(3):606–15,
Nicotine in Trapped Mainstream Preventive Medicine, 57(4):515–524, 2016. Available at 10.1111/acer.12980.
Cigarette Smoke Total Particulate 2019. Available at 10.1016/ * 387. Hatsukami, D.K., E.C. Donny, J.S.
Matter.’’ Journal of Agricultural and j.amepre.2019.05.010. Koopmeiners, et al. ‘‘Compensatory
Food Chemistry, 52(24):7240–5, 2004. * 377. Shiffman, S., B.F. Kurland, S.M. Smoking from Gradual and Immediate
Available at 10.1021/jf049455o. Scholl, et al. ‘‘Nondaily Smokers’ Reduction in Cigarette Nicotine
367. Benowitz, N.L., and J.E. Henningfield. Changes in Cigarette Consumption with Content.’’ Cancer Epidemiology,
‘‘Establishing a Nicotine Threshold for Very Low-Nicotine-Content Cigarettes: A Biomarkers and Prevention, 24(2):472–6,
Addiction. The Implications for Tobacco Randomized Double-Blind Clinical 2015. Available at 10.1158/1055-
Regulation.’’ New England Journal of Trial.’’ JAMA Psychiatry, 75(10):995– 9965.EPI-14-0739.
Medicine, 331(2):123–5, 1994. Available 1002, 2018. Available at 10.1001/ * 388. Smith, T.T., J.S. Koopmeiners, C.M.
at 10.1056/nejm199407143310212. jamapsychiatry.2018.1831. White, et al. ‘‘The Impact of Exclusive
* 368. Shiffman, S. ‘‘Tobacco ‘‘Chippers’’— * 378. Hatsukami, D.K., J.A. Jensen, D.M. Use of Very Low Nicotine Cigarettes on
Individual Differences in Tobacco Carroll, et al. ‘‘Reduced Nicotine in Compensatory Smoking: An Inpatient
Dependence.’’ Psychopharmacology Cigarettes in a Marketplace with Crossover Clinical Trial.’’ Cancer
(Berlin), 97(4):539–47, 1989. Available at Alternative Nicotine Systems: Epidemiology, Biomarkers and
10.1007/bf00439561. Randomized Clinical Trial.’’ Lancet Prevention, 29(4):880–886, 2020.
369. Becker, K.M., J.E. Rose, and A.P. Albino. Regional Health Americas, 35:100796, Available at 10.1158/1055-9965.Epi-19-
‘‘A Randomized Trial of Nicotine 2024. Available at 10.1016/ 0963.
Replacement Therapy in Combination j.lana.2024.100796. * 389. Brody, A.L., M.A. Mandelkern, R.E.
with Reduced-Nicotine Cigarettes for * 379. Hatsukami, D.K., X. Luo, J.A. Jensen, Olmstead, et al. ‘‘Ventral Striatal
Smoking Cessation.’’ Nicotine and et al. ‘‘Effect of Immediate vs Gradual Dopamine Release in Response to
Tobacco Research, 10(7):1139–48, 2008. Reduction in Nicotine Content of Smoking a Regular vs a Denicotinized
Available at 10.1080/ Cigarettes on Biomarkers of Smoke Cigarette.’’ Neuropsychopharmacology,
14622200802123294. Exposure: A Randomized Clinical Trial.’’ 34(2):282–9, 2009. Available at 10.1038/
* 370. Dermody, S.S., E.C. Donny, L.A. JAMA, 320(9):880–891, 2018. Available npp.2008.87.
Hertsgaard, et al. ‘‘Greater Reductions in at 10.1001/jama.2018.11473. * 390. Hasenfratz, M., B. Baldinger, and K.
Nicotine Exposure While Smoking Very * 380. Klemperer, E.M., X. Luo, J. Jensen, et Battig. ‘‘Nicotine or Tar Titration in
Low Nicotine Content Cigarettes Predict al. ‘‘Smoking Abstinence and Cessation- Cigarette Smoking Behavior?’’
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00102 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5133
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 112(2– of Nicotine in Humans Via Cigarette Combined Effects of Nicotine and
3):253–8, 1993. Available at 10.1007/ Smoking.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Alcohol on Working Memory Capacity in
BF02244919. Research, 18(9):1830–6, 2016. Available Nonabstinent Smokers.’’ Experimental
* 391. Higgins, S.T., S.H. Heil, S.C. Sigmon, at 10.1093/ntr/ntw082. and Clinical Psychopharmacology,
et al. ‘‘Response to Varying the Nicotine * 402. Kamens, H.M., C.P. Silva, R.T. Nye, et 18(2):120–8, 2010. Available at 10.1037/
Content of Cigarettes in Vulnerable al. ‘‘Pharmacokinetic Profile of Spectrum a0018782.
Populations: An Initial Experimental Reduced Nicotine Cigarettes.’’ Nicotine * 413. Gross, J., J. Lee, and M.L. Stitzer.
Examination of Acute Effects.’’ and Tobacco Research, 22(2):273–279, ‘‘Nicotine-Containing Versus De-
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 234(1):89– 2020. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntz045. Nicotinized Cigarettes: Effects on
98, 2017. Available at 10.1007/s00213- * 403. Branstetter, S.A., R. Nye, J.J. Sipko, et Craving and Withdrawal.’’ Pharmacology
016-4438-z. al. ‘‘The Effect of Price on the Biochemistry and Behavior, 57(1–2):159–
* 392. Tidey, J.W., R.N. Cassidy, and M.E. Consumption of Reduced Nicotine 65, 1997. Available at 10.1016/s0091-
Miller. ‘‘Smoking Topography Cigarettes.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco 3057(96)00309-7.
Characteristics of Very Low Nicotine Research, 21(7):955–961, 2019. Available * 414. Harrell, P.T., and L.M. Juliano. ‘‘A
Content Cigarettes, with and without at 10.1093/ntr/nty169. Direct Test of the Influence of Nicotine
Nicotine Replacement, in Smokers with 404. Tucker, M.R., M. Laugesen, and R.C. Response Expectancies on the Subjective
Schizophrenia and Controls.’’ Nicotine Grace. ‘‘Estimating Demand and Cross- and Cognitive Effects of Smoking.’’
and Tobacco Research, 18(9):1807–12, Price Elasticity for Very Low Nicotine Experimental and Clinical
2016. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntw089. Content (VLNC) Cigarettes Using a Psychopharmacology, 20(4):278–86,
393. Strasser, A.A., C. Lerman, P.M. Sanborn, Simulated Demand Task.’’ Nicotine and 2012. Available at 10.1037/a0028652.
et al. ‘‘New Lower Nicotine Cigarettes Tobacco Research, 20(7):843–850, 2018. 415. Juliano, L.M., E.C. Donny, E.J.
Can Produce Compensatory Smoking Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntx051. Houtsmuller, et al. ‘‘Experimental
and Increased Carbon Monoxide 405. Baldinger, B., M. Hasenfratz, and K. Evidence for a Causal Relationship
Exposure.’’ Drug and Alcohol Battig. ‘‘Switching to Ultralow Nicotine between Smoking Lapse and Relapse.’’
Dependence, 86(2–3):294–300, 2007. Cigarettes: Effects of Different Tar Yields Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
Available at 10.1016/ and Blocking of Olfactory Cues.’’ 115(1):166–73, 2006. Available at
j.drugalcdep.2006.06.017. Pharmacology Biochemistry and 10.1037/0021-843x.115.1.166.
* 394. Macqueen, D.A., B.W. Heckman, M.D. Behavior, 50(2):233–239, 1995. Available 416. Kassel, J.D., D.P. Evatt, J.E. Greenstein,
Blank, et al. ‘‘Transient Compensatory at 10.1016/0091-3057(94)00302-y.
et al. ‘‘The Acute Effects of Nicotine on
Smoking in Response to Placebo 406. Breland, A.B., A.R. Buchhalter, SE
Positive and Negative Affect in
Cigarettes.’’ Psychopharmacology Evans, et al. ‘‘Evaluating Acute Effects of
Adolescent Smokers.’’ Journal of
(Berlin), 223(1):47–54, 2012. Available at Potential Reduced-Exposure Products for
Abnormal Psychology, 116(3):543–53,
10.1007/s00213-012-2685-1. Smokers: Clinical Laboratory
2007. Available at 10.1037/0021-
* 395. Kassel, J.D., J.E. Greenstein, D.P. Evatt, Methodology.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco
843x.116.3.543.
et al. ‘‘Smoking Topography in Response Research, 4 Suppl 2:S131–40, 2002.
417. Rose, J.E., F.M. Behm, E.C. Westman, et
to Denicotinized and High-Yield Available at 10.1080/
al. ‘‘Dissociating Nicotine and
Nicotine Cigarettes in Adolescent 1462220021000032780.
Nonnicotine Components of Cigarette
Smokers.’’ Journal of Adolescent Health, * 407. Cobb, C.O., M.F. Weaver, and T.
Smoking.’’ Pharmacology Biochemistry
40(1):54–60, 2007. Available at 10.1016/ Eissenberg. ‘‘Evaluating the Acute Effects
and Behavior, 67(1):71–81, 2000.
j.jadohealth.2006.08.006. of Oral, Non-Combustible Potential
Available at 10.1016/s0091-
* 396. Juliano, L.M., L.M. Fucito, and P.T. Reduced Exposure Products Marketed to
3057(00)00301-4.
Harrell. ‘‘The Influence of Nicotine Dose Smokers.’’ Tobacco Control, 19(5):367–
* 418. Deveci, SE, F. Deveci, Y. A¸cik, et al.
and Nicotine Dose Expectancy on the 73, 2010. Available at 10.1136/
‘‘The Measurement of Exhaled Carbon
Cognitive and Subjective Effects of tc.2008.028993.
Monoxide in Healthy Smokers and Non-
Cigarette Smoking.’’ Experimental and * 408. Denlinger-Apte, R.L., R.N. Cassidy,
Smokers.’’ Respiratory Medicine,
Clinical Psychopharmacology, S.M. Colby, et al. ‘‘Effects of Cigarette
98(6):551–556, 2004. Available at
19(2):105–15, 2011. Available at Nicotine Content and Menthol
10.1016/j.rmed.2003.11.018.
10.1037/a0022937. Preference on Perceived Health Risks,
* 397. Cassidy, R.N., M.E. Miller, J.W. Tidey, Subjective Ratings, and Carbon * 419. Dallery, J., E.J. Houtsmuller, W.B.
et al. ‘‘The Impact of Nicotine Dose on Monoxide Exposure among Adolescent Pickworth, et al. ‘‘Effects of Cigarette
the Reinforcing Value of Cigarettes in Smokers.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Nicotine Content and Smoking Pace on
Adolescents.’’ Tobacco Regulatory Research, 21(Suppl 1):S56–s62, 2019. Subsequent Craving and Smoking.’’
Science, 5(2):105–114, 2019. Available at Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntz127. Psychopharmacology (Berlin),
10.18001/trs.5.2.2. * 409. Denlinger-Apte, R.L., E.C. Donny, B.R. 165(2):172–80, 2003. Available at
* 398. Higgins, S.T., S.H. Heil, S.C. Sigmon, Lindgren, et al. ‘‘Smoking Topography 10.1007/s00213-002-1242-8.
et al. ‘‘Addiction Potential of Cigarettes Characteristics during a 6-Week Trial of 420. Westman, E.C., F.M. Behm, and J.E.
with Reduced Nicotine Content in Very Low Nicotine Content Cigarettes in Rose. ‘‘Dissociating the Nicotine and
Populations with Psychiatric Disorders Smokers with Serious Mental Illness.’’ Airway Sensory Effects of Smoking.’’
and Other Vulnerabilities to Tobacco Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Pharmacology Biochemistry and
Addiction.’’ JAMA Psychiatry, 22(8):1414–1418, 2020. Available at Behavior, 53(2):309–15, 1996. Available
74(10):1056–1064, 2017. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntz198. at 10.1016/0091-3057(95)02027-6.
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.2355. * 410. Denlinger-Apte, R.L., M. Kotlyar, J.S. * 421. Hatsukami, D.K., X. Luo, A.K. Heskin,
399. Perkins, K.A., and J.L. Karelitz. ‘‘A Koopmeiners, et al. ‘‘Effects of Very Low et al. ‘‘Effects of Immediate Versus
Forced Choice Procedure to Assess the Nicotine Content Cigarettes on Smoking Gradual Nicotine Reduction in Cigarettes
Acute Relative Reinforcing Effects of Behavior and Biomarkers of Exposure in on Biomarkers of Biological Effects.’’
Nicotine Dose Per Se in Humans.’’ Menthol and Non-Menthol Smokers.’’ Addiction, 114(10):1824–1833, 2019.
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Available at 10.1111/add.14695.
22(10):1685–1693, 2019. Available at 21(Suppl 1):S63-s72, 2019. Available at * 422. Baldinger, B., M. Hasenfratz, and K.
10.1093/ntr/ntz224. 10.1093/ntr/ntz160. Battig. ‘‘Comparison of the Effects of
* 400. Perkins, K.A., and J.L. Karelitz. 411. Eid, N.C., R.V. Fant, E.T. Moolchan, et Nicotine on a Fixed Rate and a Subject-
‘‘Differences in Acute Reinforcement al. ‘‘Placebo Cigarettes in a Spaced Paced Version of the Rapid Information
across Reduced Nicotine Content Smoking Paradigm.’’ Pharmacology Processing Task.’’ Psychopharmacology
Cigarettes.’’ Psychopharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 81(1):158– (Berlin), 121(3):396–400, 1995. Available
(Berlin), 2020. Available at 10.1007/ 64, 2005. Available at 10.1016/ at 10.1007/BF02246080.
s00213-020-05509-9. j.pbb.2005.03.007. * 423. Denlinger, R.L., T.T. Smith, SE
* 401. Perkins, K.A., N. Kunkle, V.C. 412. Greenstein, J.E., J.D. Kassel, M.C. Murphy, et al. ‘‘Nicotine and Anatabine
Michael, et al. ‘‘Assessing Discrimination Wardle, et al. ‘‘The Separate and Exposure from Very Low Nicotine
VerDate Sep<11>2014 00:48 Jan 16, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00103 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5134 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Content Cigarettes.’’ Tobacco Regulatory and Attention Allocation on Independent of Nicotine Intake and Dose
Science, 2(2):186–203, 2016. Available at Physiological and Self-Report Measures Expectancy.’’ Journal of Abnormal
10.18001/trs.2.2.9. of Induced Anxiety in PTSD: A Double- Psychology, 117(1):79–93, 2008.
* 424. Kuwabara, H., S.J. Heishman, J.R. Blind Placebo-Controlled Trial.’’ Available at 10.1037/0021-843x.117.1.79.
Brasic, et al. ‘‘Mu Opioid Receptor Experimental and Clinical 445. Perkins, K.A., L. Jacobs, M. Ciccocioppo,
Binding Correlates with Nicotine Psychopharmacology, 15(2):154–64, et al. ‘‘The Influence of Instructions and
Dependence and Reward in Smokers.’’ 2007. Available at 10.1037/1064- Nicotine Dose on the Subjective and
PloS One, 9(12), 2014. e113694. 1297.15.2.154. Reinforcing Effects of Smoking.’’
Available at 10.1371/ * 435. Perkins, K.A., T. Doyle, M. Experimental and Clinical
journal.pone.0113694. Ciccocioppo, et al. ‘‘Sex Differences in Psychopharmacology, 12(2):91–101,
* 425. Rose, J.E., F.M. Behm, E.C. Westman, the Influence of Nicotine Dose 2004. Available at 10.1037/1064-
et al. ‘‘PET Studies of the Influences of Instructions on the Reinforcing and Self- 1297.12.2.91.
Nicotine on Neural Systems in Cigarette Reported Rewarding Effects of 446. Perkins, K.A., J.L. Karelitz, and N.
Smokers.’’ The American Journal of Smoking.’’ Psychopharmacology (Berlin), Kunkle. ‘‘Evaluation of Menthol Per Se
Psychiatry, 160(2):323–33, 2003. 184(3–4):600–7, 2006. Available at on Acute Perceptions and Behavioral
Available at 10.1176/appi.ajp.160.2.323. 10.1007/s00213-005-0103-7. Choice of Cigarettes Differing in Nicotine
* 426. Penetar, D.M., K.P. Lindsey, E.N. * 436. Perkins, K.A., and J.L. Karelitz. ‘‘Sex Content.’’ Journal of
Peters, et al. ‘‘Decreasing Nicotine Differences in Acute Relief of Psychopharmacology, 32(3):324–331,
Content Reduces Subjective and Abstinence-Induced Withdrawal and 2018. Available at 10.1177/
Physiological Effects of Smoking.’’ Negative Affect Due to Nicotine Content 0269881117742660.
Tobacco Use Insights, 5:1–9, 2012. in Cigarettes.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco 447. Perkins, K.A., J.L. Karelitz, and N.
Available at 10.4137/tui.s8523. Research, 17(4):443–8, 2015. Available at Kunkle. ‘‘Sex Differences in Subjective
427. Rose, J.E., E.C. Westman, F.M. Behm, et 10.1093/ntr/ntu150. Responses to Moderate Versus Very Low
al. ‘‘Blockade of Smoking Satisfaction * 437. Perkins, K.A., J.L. Karelitz, C.A. Nicotine Content Cigarettes.’’ Nicotine
Using the Peripheral Nicotinic Conklin, et al. ‘‘Acute Negative Affect and Tobacco Research, 20(10):1258–
Antagonist Trimethaphan.’’ Relief from Smoking Depends on the 1264, 2018. Available at 10.1093/ntr/
Pharmacology Biochemistry and Affect Situation and Measure but Not on ntx205.
Behavior, 62(1):165–72, 1999. Available Nicotine.’’ Biological Psychiatry, 448. Rose, J.E., L.H. Brauer, F.M. Behm, et al.
at 10.1016/S0091-3057(98)00153-1. 67(8):707–14, 2010. Available at ‘‘Psychopharmacological Interactions
428. Schlagintweit, H.E., and S.P. Barrett. 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.12.017. between Nicotine and Ethanol.’’ Nicotine
‘‘Does Acute Tobacco Smoking Prevent * 438. Ray, R., C. Jepson, F. Patterson, et al. and Tobacco Research, 6(1):133–44,
Cue-Induced Craving?’’ Journal of ‘‘Association of OPRM1 A118G Variant 2004. Available at 10.1080/
Psychopharmacology, 30(5):468–73, with the Relative Reinforcing Value of 14622200310001656957.
2016. Available at 10.1177/ Nicotine.’’ Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 449. Barrett, S.P., M. Tichauer, M. Leyton, et
0269881116639288. 188(3):355–63, 2006. Available at al. ‘‘Nicotine Increases Alcohol Self-
* 429. Naqvi, N.H., and A. Bechara. ‘‘Skin 10.1007/s00213-006-0504-2. Administration in Non-Dependent Male
Conductance Responses Are Elicited by * 439. Rukstalis, M., C. Jepson, A. Strasser, Smokers.’’ Drug and Alcohol
the Airway Sensory Effects of Puffs from et al. ‘‘Naltrexone Reduces the Relative Dependence, 81(2):197–204, 2006.
Cigarettes.’’ International Journal of Reinforcing Value of Nicotine in a Available at 10.1016/
Psychophysiology, 61(1):77–86, 2006. Cigarette Smoking Choice Paradigm.’’ j.drugalcdep.2005.06.009.
Available at 10.1016/ Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 180(1):41– * 450. Cook, J.W., B. Spring, and D.
j.ijpsycho.2005.10.018. 8, 2005. Available at 10.1007/s00213- McChargue. ‘‘Influence of Nicotine on
* 430. Brody, A.L., M.A. Mandelkern, M.R. 004-2136-8. Positive Affect in Anhedonic Smokers.’’
Costello, et al. ‘‘Brain Nicotinic * 440. Tidey, J.W., S.M. Colby, R.L. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 192(1):87–
Acetylcholine Receptor Occupancy: Denlinger-Apte, et al. ‘‘Effects of 6-Week 95, 2007. Available at 10.1007/s00213-
Effect of Smoking a Denicotinized Use of Very Low Nicotine Content 006-0688-5.
Cigarette.’’ International Journal of Cigarettes in Smokers with Serious 451. Darredeau, C., S.H. Stewart, and S.P.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 12(3):305– Mental Illness.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Barrett. ‘‘The Effects of Nicotine Content
16, 2009. Available at 10.1017/ Research, 21(Suppl 1):S38–s45, 2019. Information on Subjective and
s146114570800922x. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntz133. Behavioural Responses to Nicotine-
* 431. Brody, A.L., M.A. Mandelkern, R.E. * 441. Carter, L.P., and R.R. Griffiths. Containing and Denicotinized
Olmstead, et al. ‘‘Gene Variants of Brain ‘‘Principles of Laboratory Assessment of Cigarettes.’’ Behavioural Pharmacology,
Dopamine Pathways and Smoking- Drug Abuse Liability and Implications 24(4):291–7, 2013. Available at 10.1097/
Induced Dopamine Release in the for Clinical Development.’’ Drug and FBP.0b013e3283635fd9.
Ventral Caudate/Nucleus Accumbens.’’ Alcohol Dependence, 105 Suppl 1:S14– * 452. Brauer, L.H., F.M. Behm, E.C.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 25, 2009. Available at 10.1016/ Westman, et al. ‘‘Naltrexone Blockade of
63(7):808–16, 2006. Available at j.drugalcdep.2009.04.003. Nicotine Effects in Cigarette Smokers.’’
10.1001/archpsyc.63.7.808. * 442. Cassidy, R.N., S.M. Colby, J.W. Tidey, Psychopharmacology (Berlin),
* 432. Esterlis, I., K.P. Cosgrove, J.C. Batis, et et al. ‘‘Adolescent Smokers’ Response to 143(4):339–46, 1999. Available at
al. ‘‘Quantification of Smoking-Induced Reducing the Nicotine Content of 10.1007/s002130050957.
Occupancy of Beta2-Nicotinic Cigarettes: Acute Effects on Withdrawal * 453. Brauer, L.H., M.J. Cramblett, D.A.
Acetylcholine Receptors: Estimation of Symptoms and Subjective Evaluations.’’ Paxton, et al. ‘‘Haloperidol Reduces
Nondisplaceable Binding.’’ Journal of Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 2018. Smoking of Both Nicotine-Containing
Nuclear Medicine, 51(8):1226–33, 2010. Available at 10.1016/ and Denicotinized Cigarettes.’’
Available at 10.2967/ j.drugalcdep.2018.04.006. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 159(1):31–
jnumed.109.072447. * 443. Lindsey, K.P., B.K. Bracken, R.R. 7, 2001. Available at 10.1007/
433. Baldinger, B., M. Hasenfratz, and K. Maclean, et al. ‘‘Nicotine Content and s002130100894.
Battig. ‘‘Effects of Smoking Abstinence Abstinence State Have Different Effects * 454. Kelemen, W.L. ‘‘Stimulus and
and Nicotine Abstinence on Heart Rate, on Subjective Ratings of Positive Versus Response Expectancies Influence the
Activity and Cigarette Craving under Negative Reinforcement from Smoking.’’ Cognitive Effects of Cigarettes.’’ Journal
Field Conditions.’’ Human Pharmacology Biochemistry and of Smoking Cessation, 3(5):136–143,
Psychopharmacology, 10(2):127–136, Behavior, 103(4):710–6, 2013. Available 2008. Available at 10.1375/jsc.3.2.136.
1995. Available at 10.1002/ at 10.1016/j.pbb.2012.11.012. * 455. Karelitz, J.L., and K.A. Perkins. ‘‘Acute
hup.470100207. 444. Perkins, K.A., M. Ciccocioppo, C.A. Subjective Sensory Perceptions Predict
434. Buckley, T.C., D.R. Holohan, S.L. Conklin, et al. ‘‘Mood Influences on Relative Reinforcing Effects of Smoked
Mozley, et al. ‘‘The Effect of Nicotine Acute Smoking Responses Are Nicotine.’’ Addictive Behaviors,
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00104 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5135
117:106835, 2021. Available at 10.1016/ * 466. Rose, J.E., A. Salley, F.M. Behm, et al. Cigarette: Physical Properties and HPHC
j.addbeh.2021.106835. ‘‘Reinforcing Effects of Nicotine and Yields.’’ Tobacco Regulatory Science,
* 456. Rubenstein, D., M.M. Sweitzer, L.B. Non-Nicotine Components of Cigarette 3(4):459–478, 2017. Available at
Scroggs, et al. ‘‘Menthol Preference Smoke.’’ Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 10.18001/trs.3.4.7.
Moderates the Relationship between 210(1):1–12, 2010. Available at 10.1007/ * 478. Arrecis, J.J., J.A. Mathis, R.D. Stanelle,
Cigarette Nicotine Content Choice and s00213-010-1810-2. et al. Laboratory Information Bulletin
Reactions in Young Adults Who Smoke * 467. Tidey, J.W., D.J. Rohsenow, G.B. No. 4692. Update to LIB No. 4550
Infrequently.’’ Drug and Alcohol Kaplan, et al. ‘‘Separate and Combined Quantitation of Nicotine in Tobacco
Dependence, 238:109580, 2022. Effects of Very Low Nicotine Cigarettes Products. Atlanta, GA: HHS, Food and
Available at 10.1016/ and Nicotine Replacement in Smokers Drug Administration, Center for Tobacco
j.drugalcdep.2022.109580. with Schizophrenia and Controls.’’ Products. 2025. Available at https://
* 457. Denlinger-Apte, R.L., D.L. Joel, A.A. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, www.fda.gov/science-research/field-
Strasser, et al. ‘‘Low Nicotine Content 15(1):121–9, 2013. Available at 10.1093/ science-and-laboratories/laboratory-
Descriptors Reduce Perceived Health ntr/nts098. information-bulletins.
Risks and Positive Cigarette Ratings in * 468. Dedert, E.A., P.S. Calhoun, L.A. * 479. CORESTA. Recommended Methods
Participants Using Very Low Nicotine Harper, et al. ‘‘Smoking Withdrawal in No. 62—Determination of Nicotine in
Content Cigarettes.’’ Nicotine and Smokers with and without Posttraumatic Tobacco and Tobacco Products by Gas
Tobacco Research, 19(10):1149–1154, Stress Disorder.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Chromatographic Analysis. Cooperation
2017. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntw320. Research, 14(3):372–6, 2012. Available at Centre for Scientific Research Relative to
* 458. Vogel, R.I., L.A. Hertsgaard, S.S. 10.1093/ntr/ntr142. Tobacco; 2021. Accessed July 11, 2023.
Dermody, et al. ‘‘Sex Differences in 469. Rose, J.E., F.M. Behm, E.C. Westman, et https://www.coresta.org/determination-
Response to Reduced Nicotine Content al. ‘‘Pharmacologic and Sensorimotor nicotine-tobacco-and-tobacco-products-
Cigarettes.’’ Addictive Behaviors, Components of Satiation in Cigarette gas-chromatographic-analysis-
39(7):1197–204, 2014. Available at Smoking.’’ Pharmacology Biochemistry 29185.html.
10.1016/j.addbeh.2014.03.021. and Behavior, 76(2):243–50, 2003. * 480. CORESTA. Recommended Methods
459. Streck, J.M., D.R. Davis, R.D. Pang, et al. Available at 10.1016/j.pbb.2003.07.002. No. 87—Determination of Nicotine in
‘‘Potential Moderating Effects of Sex/ 470. Attwood, A.S., I.S. Penton-Voak, and Tobacco Products by GC–MS.
Gender on the Acute Relative
M.R. Munafo. ‘‘Effects of Acute Nicotine Cooperation Centre for Scientific
Reinforcing and Subjective Effects of
Administration on Ratings of Research Relative to Tobacco; 2020.
Reduced Nicotine Content Cigarettes in
Attractiveness of Facial Cues.’’ Nicotine Accessed July 11, 2023. https://
Vulnerable Populations.’’ Nicotine and
and Tobacco Research, 11(1):44–8, 2009. www.coresta.org/determination-nicotine-
Tobacco Research, 22(6):878–884, 2019.
Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntn006. tobacco-products-gc-ms-33537.html.
Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntz098.
* 471. Dermody, S.S., F.J. McClernon, N. * 481. CORESTA. CORESTA Technical
* 460. Adams, S., A.S. Attwood, and M.R.
Benowitz, et al. ‘‘Effects of Reduced Report: 2019 Collaborative Study for the
Munafo. ‘‘Effects of Nicotine and
Nicotine Content Cigarettes on Determination of Nicotine in Tobacco
Nicotine Expectancy on Attentional Bias
Individual Withdrawal Symptoms over and Tobacco Products. CORESTA
for Emotional Stimuli.’’ Nicotine and
Time and during Abstinence.’’ Tobacco and Tobacco Products Analytes
Tobacco Research, 17(6):697–703, 2015.
Experimental and Clinical Sub-Group; 2020. https://
Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntu219.
Psychopharmacology, 26(3):223–232, www.coresta.org/sites/default/files/
* 461. Addicott, M.A., B. Froeliger, R.V. 2018. Available at 10.1037/pha0000179. technical_documents/main/TTPA-193-1-
Kozink, et al. ‘‘Nicotine and Non-
* 472. Rose, J.E., F.M. Behm, A.N. Salley, et CTR_2019-CollStudy-Nicotine_
Nicotine Smoking Factors Differentially
al. ‘‘Regional Brain Activity Correlates of April2020.pdf.
Modulate Craving, Withdrawal and
Nicotine Dependence.’’ * 482. CORESTA. Technical Report: CVAR–
Cerebral Blood Flow as Measured with
Neuropsychopharmacology, 081-Ctr Study of Short-Term Variability
Arterial Spin Labeling.’’
32(12):2441–52, 2007. Available at of Commercial Cigarettes through Select
Neuropsychopharmacology,
10.1038/sj.npp.1301379. Cigarette Constituent Testing. CORESTA
39(12):2750–9, 2014. Available at
* 473. CDC. ‘‘Current Tobacco Use among Cigarette Variability Task Force; 2018.
10.1038/npp.2014.108.
462. Barrett, S.P. ‘‘The Effects of Nicotine, Middle and High School Students— https://www.coresta.org/short-term-
Denicotinized Tobacco, and Nicotine- United States, 2011.’’ MMWR Morbidity variability-commercial-cigarettes-
Containing Tobacco on Cigarette and Mortality Weekly Report, through-select-cigarette-constituent-
Craving, Withdrawal, and Self- 61(31):581–5, 2012. Available at https:// testing-31590.
Administration in Male and Female www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/ * 483. Dunsby, J., and L. Bero. ‘‘A Nicotine
Smokers.’’ Behavioural Pharmacology, mmwrhtml/mm6131a1.htm?s_ Delivery Device without the Nicotine?
21(2):144–52, 2010. Available at cid=mm6131a1_w. Tobacco Industry Development of Low
10.1097/FBP.0b013e328337be68. 474. Kozlowski, L.T., K.M. Dollar, and G.A. Nicotine Cigarettes.’’ Tobacco Control,
463. Barrett, S.P., M.L. Campbell, S. Roach, Giovino. ‘‘Cigar/Cigarillo Surveillance: 13(4):362–9, 2004. Available at 10.1136/
et al. ‘‘The Effects of Alcohol on Limitations of the U.S. Department of tc.2004.007914.
Responses to Nicotine-Containing and Agriculture System.’’ American Journal * 484. Yerger, V.B. ‘‘Menthol’s Potential
Denicotinized Cigarettes in Dependent of Preventive Medicine, 34(5):424–6, Effects on Nicotine Dependence: A
and Nondaily Smokers.’’ Alcoholism, 2008. Available at 10.1016/ Tobacco Industry Perspective.’’ Tobacco
Clinical and Experimental Research, j.amepre.2007.12.025. Control, 20:ii29-ii36, 2011. Available at
37(8):1402–9, 2013. Available at * 475. Cullen, J., P. Mowery, C. Delnevo, et 10.1136/tc.2010.041970.
10.1111/acer.12094. al. ‘‘Seven-Year Patterns in US Cigar Use * 485. Hempfling, W. Philip Morris and the
464. Barrett, S.P., and C. Darredeau. ‘‘The Epidemiology among Young Adults ‘New Biotechnology’. Philip Morris
Acute Effects of Nicotine on the Aged 18–25 Years: A Focus on Race/ Records; Master Settlement Agreement,
Subjective and Behavioural Responses to Ethnicity and Brand.’’ American Journal 1987. Available at https://
Denicotinized Tobacco in Dependent of Public Health, 101(10):1955–62, 2011. www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/
Smokers.’’ Behavioural Pharmacology, Available at 10.2105/ajph.2011.300209. ntpw0123.
23(3):221–7, 2012. Available at 10.1097/ * 476. Goel, R., N. Trushin, S.M. Reilly, et * 486. Philip Morris, P.M., and M.B. Venable.
FBP.0b013e328353431c. al. ‘‘A Survey of Nicotine Yields in Small Notification of Issuance of U.S. Patent.
* 465. Guillot, C.R., M.D. Stone, B.A. Geary, Cigar Smoke: Influence of Cigar Design Philip Morris Records; Master Settlement
et al. ‘‘Pharmacological, Sensorimotor, and Smoking Regimens.’’ Nicotine and Agreement, 1997. Available at https://
and Expectancy Effects on Tobacco Tobacco Research, 20(10):1250–1257, www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/
Withdrawal: A Preliminary Study.’’ 2018. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntx220. tqhx0108.
Human Psychopharmacology, 30(5):364– * 477. Hamad, S.H., N.M. Johnson, M.E. * 487. RJ Reynolds. Executive Summary. RJ
71, 2015. Available at 10.1002/hup.2484. Tefft, et al. ‘‘Little Cigars vs 3r4f Reynolds Records; Master Settlement
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00105 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5136 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Agreement, 1992. Available at https:// * 500. Hashimoto, T., and A. Kato, inventors; Settlement Agreement, 1999. Available
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ 22nd Century Limited LLC, assignee. at https://www.industrydocuments.
zhkp0102. Reducing Levels of Nicotine Alkaloids in ucsf.edu/docs/qqbj0066.
488. Legg, P.D., and G.B. Collins. Plants. U.S. Patent No. 8,791,329. U.S. * 512. Groome, J.W. Product Development
‘‘Inheritance of Percent Total Alkaloids July 29, 2014. Committee: Meeting Report #60. British
in Nicotiana Tabacum L. Ii. Genetic * 501. Page, J., and A.T. Todd, inventors; American Tobacco Records; Master
Effects of Two Loci in Burley 21× La 22nd Century Limited LLC, assignee. Up- Settlement Agreement, 1972. Available
Burley 21 Populations.’’ Canadian Regulation of Auxin Response Factor at https://www.industrydocuments.
Journal of Genetics and Cytology, NBTF7 to Decrease Nicotine in a Plant. ucsf.edu/docs/gtjd0205.
13(2):287–291, 1971. Available at U.S. Patent No. 10,669,552 B2. U.S. * 513. Lor Lorrillard, and J.R. Reid.
10.1139/g71-047. Patent application 15/985,146. June 2, Investigation into Extraction of Nicotine
* 489. Valleau, W.D. Breeding Low-Nicotine 2020. from Tobacco. Lorillard Records; Master
Tobacco. Journal of Agricultural * 502. Schachtsiek, J., and F. Stehle. Settlement Agreement, 1977. Available
Research, 1949. p. 171–181. Available at ‘‘Nicotine-Free, Nontransgenic Tobacco at https://www.industrydocuments.
https://www.industrydocuments. (Nicotiana Tabacum L.) Edited by ucsf.edu/docs/lpcg0054.
ucsf.edu/tobacco/docs/#id=tqmv0084. CRISPR-Cas9.’’ Plant Biotechnology * 514. RJ Reynolds. MBO Evaluation
* 490. Evans, L.M. Low Nicotine Tobacco. Journal, 17(12):2228–2230, 2019. Summary. RJ Reynolds Records; Master
Philip Morris Records; Master Settlement Available at 10.1111/pbi.13193. Settlement Agreement, 1976. Available
Agreement, 1971. Available at https:// * 503. Lewis, R.S., K.E. Drake-Stowe, C. at https://www.industrydocuments.
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ Heim, et al. ‘‘Genetic and Agronomic ucsf.edu/docs/nknv0094.
xmfc0131. Analysis of Tobacco Genotypes * 515. Imperial Tobacco Company (GB
* 491. Meyer, L.F. Low Nicotine Cigaretes, Exhibiting Reduced Nicotine Limited), and ACB. Report Regarding
Smoking & Health Study Meeting. Philip Accumulation Due to Induced Mutations Test on Quality of Final Flue-Cured
Morris Records; Master Settlement in Berberine Bridge Like (Bbl) Genes.’’ Product. British American Tobacco
Agreement, 1971. Available at https:// Frontiers in Plant Science, 11:368, 2020. Records; Master Settlement Agreement,
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ Available at 10.3389/fpls.2020.00368. 1969. Available at https://
nyld0122. * 504. Ashburn, G., Chemical Engineering, I www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/
* 492. Smith, T.E. Report Number 72–18
SOJ, et al. Vapor-Phase Removal of pfmm0213.
Tobacco and Smoke Characteristics of
Nicotine from Tobacco. RJ Reynolds * 516. Passey-M Imperial Tobacco Co.
Low Nicotine Strains of Burley. Brown &
Records; Minnesota Documents; Master Canadian Sucker Control Studies 630000
Williamson Records; Master Settlement
Settlement Agreement, 1961. Available Crop. Brown & Williamson Records;
Agreement, 1972. Available at https://
at https://www.industrydocuments. Master Settlement Agreement, 1964.
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/
ucsf.edu/docs/qnxb0094. Available at https://
mxjy0131.
* 505. Lorrillard, L., W.E. Crouse, and J.R. www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/
* 493. Wayne, G.F. Tobacco Industry
Reid. Nicotine Extraction. Preliminary jyck0141.
Research on Modification of Nicotine
Study of Methods for High Nicotine Leaf * 517. Philip Morris. 800000 D.R.S. Ridomil
Content in Tobacco (1960–1980). 2012.
Extraction. Lorillard Records; Master Experiment. Philip Morris Records;
Available at https://downloads.
Settlement Agreement, 1976. Available Master Settlement Agreement; 1980. p.
regulations.gov/FDA-2017-N-6189-0097/
at https://www.industrydocuments. 2000268390–2000268392. Available at
content.pdf.
ucsf.edu/docs/shbh0113. https://www.industrydocuments.
* 494. Hudson, A.B. Organoleptic Evaluation
* 506. Wakeham, H. ’Active R&D Topics’ ucsf.edu/docs/pjbk0181.
of Low Alkaloid Sample 8059. Lorillard
Presented to Products Committee by Dr. 518. Guo, Y., E. Hiatt, C. Bonnet, et al.
Records; Master Settlement Agreement,
H. Wakeham 610620. Philip Morris Chapter 5—Molecular Regulation and
1973. Available at https://
Records; Master Settlement Agreement, Genetic Manipulation of Alkaloid
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/
1961. Available at https:// Accumulation in Tobacco Plants. In:
rfjk0118.
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ Atta-ur-Rahman, (Ed.). Studies in
* 495. Johnson, D.P. Low Nicotine Tobacco.
tqxj0127. Natural Products Chemistry. Elsevier.
RJ Reynolds Records; Master Settlement
Agreement, 1977. Available at https:// 507. Robinson, M.L., E.J. Houtsmuller, E.T. 2021:119–149. Available at 10.1016/
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ Moolchan, et al. ‘‘Placebo Cigarettes in B978-0-12-819489-8.00006-5.
gfch0092. Smoking Research.’’ Experimental and 519. Dawson, R.F. ‘‘Accumulation of
* 496. Kentucky Tobacco Research Board. Clinical Psychopharmacology, 8(3):326– Nicotine in Reciprocal Grafts of Tomato
Kentucky Tobacco Research Board— 32, 2000. Available at 10.1037//1064- and Tobacco.’’ American Journal of
1977 Annual Review. Ness Motley Law 1297.8.3.326. Botany, 29(1):66–71, 1942. Available at
Firm Documents; Master Settlement 508. Fischer, M., and T.M. Jefferies. 10.2307/2436544.
Agreement, 1977. Available at https:// ‘‘Optimization of Nicotine Extraction * 520. Ren, M., M. Zhang, H. Yang, et al.
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ from Tobacco Using Supercritical Fluid ‘‘Reducing the Nicotine Content of
lqdh0045. Technology with Dynamic Extraction Tobacco by Grafting with Eggplant.’’
* 497. RJ Reynolds, and C.L. Neumann. Low Modeling.’’ Journal of Agricultural and BMC Plant Biology, 20(1):285, 2020.
Nicotine Tobacco Samples. RJ Reynolds Food Chemistry, 44(5):1258–1264, 1996. Available at 10.1186/s12870-020-02459-
Records; Master Settlement Agreement, Available at 10.1021/jf950502+. 4.
1977. Available at https:// * 509. Grubbs, H.J., R. Prasad, and T.M. * 521. U.S. District Court for the District of
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ Howell, inventors; Philip Morris USA Columbia United States of America,
ktnx0095. Inc., assignee. Selective Basic Plaintiff, Versus Philip Morris, USA, et
* 498. Boswall, G.W. Project T–6534: Component Removal from Material Esp. al., Defendants, Civil Action no 99–2496
Tobacco for Reconstitution. British Nicotine from Tobacco, by Solvent (GK). United States’ Written Direct
American Tobacco Records; Master Followed by Selective Removal of Examination of William A. Farone, Ph.D.
Settlement Agreement, 1971. Available Desired Component by Extn., Esp. With Submitted Pursuant to Order #471.
at https://www.industrydocuments. Acid Not Soluble in Solvent. U.S. Patent https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/
ucsf.edu/docs/krjx0211. No. 5,018,540. U.S. 1991. files/civil/legacy/2014/09/11/
* 499. Rothmans of Pall Mall Canada * 510. Roselius, W., O. Vitzthum, and P. 20040929%20Written%20Direct%20
Limited, and N. Cohen. Minutes of Hubert, inventors; Studiengesellschaft Testimony%20for%20William%20
Meeting on May 6 1971. British Kohle gGmbH, assignee. Process for the Farone%20PhD_0.pdf
American Tobacco Records; Master Extraction of Nicotine from Tobacco. * 522. Office of the Federal Register, and
Settlement Agreement, 1971. Available U.S. Patent No. 4,153,063. U.S. 1979. National Archives and Records
at https://www.industrydocuments. * 511. Philip Morris. The ‘‘Denicotinized’’ Administration. 60 Fr 41453—Analysis
ucsf.edu/docs/hrjx0211. Cigarette. Philip Morris Records; Master Regarding the Food and Drug
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00106 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5137
Administration’s Jurisdiction over * 533. Geiss, V.L. Bw Process Vi: Metabolism USA: A Multistate Transition Analysis of
Nicotine-Containing Cigarettes and of Nicotine and Other Biochemistry of Youth and Adults in the PATH Study in
Smokeless Tobacco Products. Rockville, the Bw Process. British American 2015–2017 vs 2017–2019.’’ Tobacco
MD: National Archives and Records Tobacco Records; Master Settlement Control, 33(5):570–579, 2024. Available
Administration, Office of the Federal Agreement, 1975. Available at https:// at 10.1136/tc-2022-057905.
Register. 1995. Available at https:// www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ * 544. Doll, R., R. Peto, J. Boreham, et al.
www.gpo.gov/fdsys/granule/FR-1995-08- zgvw0212. ‘‘Mortality from Cancer in Relation to
11/95-20052 * 534. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Smoking: 50 Years Observations on
* 523. Harwood, E.H., and S.O. Jones. Corporation, L.E. Gravely, R.P. Newton, British Doctors.’’ British Journal of
Tobacco Products Development. et al. Bw Process: IV Evaluation of Low Cancer, 92(3):426–9, 2005. Available at
Monthly Product Development Report. Nicotine Cigarettes Used for Consumer 10.1038/sj.bjc.6602359.
Tobacco Products Development. MPRD– Product Testing. British American * 545. National Center for Health Statistics.
T, 1966 (660000), No. 5. RJ Reynolds Tobacco Records; Master Settlement ‘‘Public-Use Linked Mortality Files,
Records; Master Settlement Agreement, Agreement, 1973. Available at https:// 2019.’’ CDC, National Center for Health
1966. Available at https:// www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ Statistics. Accessed June, 2022. https://
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ fmff0193. www.cdc.gov/nchs/data-linkage/
glmb0086. * 535. Berger, C., inventor; Methods for mortality-public.htm.
* 524. Lorillard. Unnamed Report. Lorillard Reducing the Nicotine Content of * 546. Xu, J., S.L. Murphy, K.D. Kochanek,
Records; Master Settlement Agreement, Tobacco Plants and Tobacco Plants et al. ‘‘Deaths: Final Data for 2019.’’
1967. Available at https:// Obtained Thereby. U.S. Patent No. National Vital Statistics Reports, 70(8),
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ 7,538,071 B2. U.S. May 26, 2009. 2021. Available at 10.15620/cdc:106058.
pzhp0046. * 536. Jones, N.M., M.G. Bernardo-Gil, and 547. Hyndman, R.J. ‘‘Package ‘‘Demography’’:
525. Tengs, T.O., S. Ahmad, J.M. Savage, et M.G. Louren¸co. ‘‘Comparison of Methods Forecasting Mortality, Fertility,
al. ‘‘The Ama Proposal to Mandate for Extraction of Tobacco Alkaloids.’’ Migration and Population Data.’’ R
Nicotine Reduction in Cigarettes: A Journal of AOAC International, Package Version 2, 2023. Available at
Simulation of the Population Health 84(2):309–16, 2001. Available at https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/
Impacts.’’ Preventive Medicine, 10.1093/jaoac/84.2.309. demography/index.html.
40(2):170–80, 2005. Available at
* 537. General Cigar Company Incorporated. 548. Lee, R.D., and L.R. Carter. ‘‘Modeling
10.1016/j.ypmed.2004.05.017.
Tobacco Processing and Resulting and Forecasting US Mortality.’’ Journal
* 526. Bernasek, P.F., O.P. Furin, and G.R.
Product. British American Tobacco of the American Statistical Association,
Shelar. Sugar/Nicotine Study. Product
Records; Master Settlement Agreement, 87(419):659–671, 1992. Available at
Design; Master Settlement Agreement,
1962. Available at https:// 10.2307/2290201.
1992. Available at https://
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ * 549. Villegas, A.M., V.K. Kaishev, and P.
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/
kylm0200. Millossovich. ‘‘StMoMo: An R Package
fxbl0037.
* 538. Lowe, R.D. Letter from Rd Lowe to for Stochastic Mortality Modeling.’’
* 527. British American Tobacco.
Jhm Hoppenbrouwers Regarding Low Journal of Statistical Software, 84(3):1–
Introductory Notes on Leaf Blending.
Nicotine Cigar. British American 38, 2018. Available at 10.18637/
British American Tobacco Records;
Tobacco Records; Master Settlement jss.v084.i03.
Master Settlement Agreement, 1969.
Agreement, 1975. Available at https:// 550. Rubinstein, R.Y., and D.P. Kroese.
Available at https://
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ Simulation and the Monte Carlo Method.
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/
lhdl0193. Wiley Series in Probability and
sgpy0200.
* 539. 22nd Century Group Inc. 22nd Century Statistics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2016.
* 528. Tso, T.C. ‘‘Potential for Producing
Group Inc. Modified Risk Tobacco Available at 10.1002/9781118631980.
Safer Cigarette Tobacco.’’ Agricultural
Product (MRTP) Applications, Section 551. Montgomery, DC Design and Analysis of
Science Review, 10:1–10, 1972. Available
VIII Part 4—Scientific Studies—Clinical. Experiments, 8th Edition. Wiley, 2012.
at https://www.industrydocuments.
HHS, FDA. 2019. Available at https:// Available at https://www.wiley.com/en-
ucsf.edu/tobacco/docs/#id=zmfl0214.
www.fda.gov/tobacco-products/ us/Design+and+Analysis+of+
* 529. Tso, T.C. Simple Correlation and
Multiple Regression among Leaf advertising-and-promotion/22nd- Experiments%2C+10th+Edition-p-
Characteristics, Smoke Components, and century-group-inc-modified-risk-tobacco- 9781119492443.
Biological Responses of Bright Tobaccos. product-mrtp-applications. * 552. Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Technical Bulletin. US Department of * 540. Chen, J., R. Higby, D. Tian, et al. Services Administration. Key Substance
Agriculture, Agricultural Research ‘‘Toxicological Analysis of Low-Nicotine Use and Mental Health Indicators in the
Service, 1977. Available at https:// and Nicotine-Free Cigarettes.’’ United States: Results from the 2021
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/ Toxicology, 249(2–3):194–203, 2008. National Survey on Drug Use and
tobacco/docs/#id=xflf0004. Available at 10.1016/j.tox.2008.05.009. Health. Rockville, MD: SAMHSA, Center
* 530. American Tobacco Company. Table * 541. Tam, J., D.T. Levy, J. Jeon, et al. for Behavioral Health Statistics and
Xiii, Summary of Flue-Cured Aging ‘‘Projecting the Effects of Tobacco Quality. 2022. Available at https://
Study, Forced Aging. American Tobacco Control Policies in the USA through www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2021-
Records; Master Settlement Agreement, Microsimulation: A Study Protocol.’’ nsduh-annual-national-report.
1991. Available at https:// BMJ Open, 8(3):e019169, 2018. Available * 553. Kandel, D.B., M.C. Hu, P.C. Griesler,
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ at 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019169. et al. ‘‘On the Development of Nicotine
xpcb0141. * 542. HHS, NIH, National Institute on Drug Dependence in Adolescence.’’ Drug and
* 531. Mitchell, T.G. PRT and Tobacco Abuse, et al. Initiation of Electronic Alcohol Dependence, 91(1):26–39, 2007.
Biomodification. British American Nicotine Delivery Systems (ENDS) Available at 10.1016/
Tobacco Records; Master Settlement between Two Consecutive Waves among j.drugalcdep.2007.04.011.
Agreement, 1973. Available at https:// Young Adults (Aged 18–24), by * 554. Counotte, D.S., A.B. Smit, T. Pattij, et
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ Sociodemographics. In PATH Study al. ‘‘Development of the Motivational
yqyh0203. Data Tables and Figures. Inter-university System during Adolescence, and Its
* 532. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Consortium for Political and Social Sensitivity to Disruption by Nicotine.’’
Corporation, and V.L. Geiss. Bw Process Research, 2021. Available at https:// Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience,
I: Reductions of Tobacco Nicotine Using www.icpsr.umich.edu/files/nahdap/ 1(4):430–43, 2011. Available at 10.1016/
Selected Bacteria. British American pathstudy/YoungAdult-Initiation- j.dcn.2011.05.010.
Tobacco Records; Master Settlement ENDS.pdf. 555. Jacobsen, L.K., J.H. Krystal, W.E. Mencl,
Agreement, 1972. Available at https:// * 543. Brouwer, A.F., J. Jeon, E. Jimenez- et al. ‘‘Effects of Smoking and Smoking
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ Mendoza, et al. ‘‘Changing Patterns of Abstinence on Cognition in Adolescent
lrdl0211. Cigarette and ENDS Transitions in the Tobacco Smokers.’’ Biological
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00107 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5138 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Psychiatry, 57(1):56–66, 2005. Available of Smoking and Benefits of Cessation in January 20, 2023. www.cdc.gov/tobacco/
at 10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.10.022. the United States.’’ New England Journal quit_smoking/how_to_quit/benefits/.
* 556. Musso, F., F. Bettermann, G. of Medicine, 368(4):341–50, 2013. * 579. HHS. Health, United States, 2019.
Vucurevic, et al. ‘‘Smoking Impacts on Available at 10.1056/NEJMsa1211128. Hyattsville, MD: HHS, CDC, National
Prefrontal Attentional Network Function * 567. Thun, M.J., B.D. Carter, D. Feskanich, Center for Health Statistics. 2021.
in Young Adult Brains.’’ et al. ‘‘50-Year Trends in Smoking- Available at 10.15620/cdc:100685.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), Related Mortality in the United States.’’ * 580. Cook, B.L., G.F. Wayne, E.N. Kafali, et
191(1):159–69, 2007. Available at New England Journal of Medicine, al. ‘‘Trends in Smoking among Adults
10.1007/s00213-006-0499-8. 368(4):351–64, 2013. Available at with Mental Illness and Association
* 557. Henley, S.J., C.J. Connell, P. Richter, 10.1056/NEJMsa1211127. between Mental Health Treatment and
et al. ‘‘Tobacco-Related Disease Mortality * 568. World Health Organization. ‘‘Tobacco: Smoking Cessation.’’ JAMA, 311(2):172–
among Men Who Switched from Health Benefits of Smoking Cessation.’’ 82, 2014. Available at 10.1001/
Cigarettes to Spit Tobacco.’’ Tobacco WHO.Int. Updated February 25, 2020. jama.2013.284985.
Control, 16(1):22–8, 2007. Available at Accessed November 3, 2021. https:// * 581. Guydish, J., E. Passalacqua, A. Pagano,
10.1136/tc.2006.018069. www.who.int/news-room/questions-and- et al. ‘‘An International Systematic
558. Euromonitor International. Cigarettes in answers/item/tobacco-health-benefits-of- Review of Smoking Prevalence in
the US. 2018. Passport Country Report. smoking-cessation. Addiction Treatment.’’ Addiction,
November. http:// * 569. Shah, R.S., and J.W. Cole. ‘‘Smoking 111(2):220–30, 2016. Available at
www.euromonitor.com/. and Stroke: The More You Smoke the 10.1111/add.13099.
* 559. Cornelius, M.E., P. Driezen, A. Hyland, More You Stroke.’’ Expert Review of 582. Richter, K.P., H.K. Ahluwalia, M.C.
et al. ‘‘Trends in Cigarette Pricing and Cardiovascular Therapy, 8(7):917–32, Mosier, et al. ‘‘A Population-Based Study
Purchasing Patterns in a Sample of US 2010. Available at 10.1586/erc.10.56. of Cigarette Smoking among Illicit Drug
Smokers: Findings from the ITC US * 570. McBride, C.M., and J.S. Ostroff. Users in the United States.’’ Addiction,
Surveys (2002–2011).’’ Tobacco Control, ‘‘Teachable Moments for Promoting 97(7):861–9, 2002. Available at 10.1046/
24 Suppl 3(0 3):iii4-iii10, 2015. Smoking Cessation: The Context of j.1360-0443.2002.00162.x.
583. Schroeder, S.A., and C.D. Morris.
Available at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol- Cancer Care and Survivorship.’’ Cancer
‘‘Confronting a Neglected Epidemic:
2013-051376. Control, 10(4):325–33, 2003. Available at
Tobacco Cessation for Persons with
* 560. National Research Council. 10.1177/107327480301000407.
Mental Illnesses and Substance Abuse
Understanding the US Illicit Tobacco * 571. Parsons, A., A. Daley, R. Begh, et al.
Problems.’’ Annual Review of Public
Market: Characteristics, Policy Context, ‘‘Influence of Smoking Cessation after
Health, 31:297–314 1p following 314,
and Lessons from International Diagnosis of Early Stage Lung Cancer on
2010. Available at 10.1146/
Experiences. Washington, DC: National Prognosis: Systematic Review of
annurev.publhealth.012809.103701.
Academies Press, 2015. Available at Observational Studies with Meta-
* 584. Steinberg, M.L., J.M. Williams, and Y.
https://nap.nationalacademies.org/ Analysis.’’ British Medical Journal,
Li. ‘‘Poor Mental Health and Reduced
catalog/19016/understanding-the-us- 340:b5569, 2010. Available at 10.1136/
Decline in Smoking Prevalence.’’
illicit-tobacco-market-characteristics- bmj.b5569.
American Journal of Preventive
policy-context-and. * 572. Travis, L.B., C.S. Rabkin, L.M. Brown,
Medicine, 49(3):362–9, 2015. Available
* 561. Fix, B.V., A. Hyland, R.J. O’Connor, et et al. ‘‘Cancer Survivorship—Genetic
at 10.1016/j.amepre.2015.01.016.
al. ‘‘A Novel Approach to Estimating the Susceptibility and Second Primary
* 585. Williams, J.M., M.L. Steinberg, K.G.
Prevalence of Untaxed Cigarettes in the Cancers: Research Strategies and
Griffiths, et al. ‘‘Smokers with Behavioral
USA: Findings from the 2009 and 2010 Recommendations.’’ Journal of the
Health Comorbidity Should Be
International Tobacco Control Surveys.’’ National Cancer Institute, 98(1):15–25,
Designated a Tobacco Use Disparity
Tobacco Control, 23(1):i61-i66, 2014. 2006. Available at 10.1093/jnci/djj001.
Group.’’ American Journal of Public
Available at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol- 573. Sheikh, M., A. Mukeriya, O. Shangina,
Health, 103(9):1549–55, 2013. Available
2013-051038. et al. ‘‘Postdiagnosis Smoking Cessation at 10.2105/ajph.2013.301232.
* 562. Levy, D.T., C.J. Cadham, L.M. and Reduced Risk for Lung Cancer * 586. Lindson, N., A. Theodoulou, J.M.
Sanchez-Romero, et al. ‘‘An Expert Progression and Mortality: A Prospective Ordo´n˜ez-Mena, et al. ‘‘Pharmacological
Elicitation on the Effects of a Ban on Cohort Study.’’ Annals of Internal and Electronic Cigarette Interventions for
Menthol Cigarettes and Cigars in the Medicine, 174(9):1232–1239, 2021. Smoking Cessation in Adults:
United States.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Available at 10.7326/m21-0252. Component Network Meta-Analyses.’’
Research, 23(11):1911–1920, 2021. * 574. Kaiser, E.G., J.J. Prochaska, and M.S. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntab121. Kendra. ‘‘Tobacco Cessation in Oncology Reviews, 9(9):Cd015226, 2023. Available
* 563. HHS. The Health Benefits of Smoking Care.’’ Oncology, 95(3):129–137, 2018. at 10.1002/14651858.CD015226.pub2.
Cessation. A Report of the Surgeon Available at 10.1159/000489266. * 587. Pacek, L.R., J.A. Oliver, M.M.
General. Rockville, MD: HHS, Public * 575. Rosoff, D.B., J. Yoo, and F.W. Lohoff. Sweitzer, et al. ‘‘Young Adult Dual
Health Service, CDC, National Center for ‘‘Smoking Is Significantly Associated Combusted Cigarette and E-Cigarette
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health with Increased Risk of Covid-19 and Users’ Anticipated Responses to a
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Other Respiratory Infections.’’ Nicotine Reduction Policy and Menthol
Health. 1990. Available at https:// Communications Biology, 4(1):1230, Ban in Combusted Cigarettes.’’ Drug and
www.google.com/books/edition/The_ 2021. Available at 10.1038/s42003-021- Alcohol Dependence, 194:40–44, 2019.
Health_Benefits_of_Smoking_Cessation/ 02685-y. Available at 10.1016/
WABbHqK6dFsC?hl=en&gbpv=0. * 576. Taylor, D.H., Jr., V. Hasselblad, S.J. j.drugalcdep.2018.10.005.
* 564. Rostron, B.L., C.M. Chang, and T.F. Henley, et al. ‘‘Benefits of Smoking * 588. Tsai, J., D.M. Homa, A.S. Gentzke, et
Pechacek. ‘‘Estimation of Cigarette Cessation for Longevity.’’ American al. ‘‘Exposure to Secondhand Smoke
Smoking-Attributable Morbidity in the Journal of Public Health, 92(6):990–6, among Nonsmokers—United States,
United States.’’ JAMA Internal Medicine, 2002. Available at 10.2105/ 1988–2014.’’ MMWR Morbidity and
174(12):1922–8, 2014. Available at ajph.92.6.990. Mortality Weekly Report, 67(48):1342–
10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.5219. * 577. Peto, R., S. Darby, H. Deo, et al. 1346, 2018. Available at 10.15585/
* 565. Jia, H., and E.I. Lubetkin. ‘‘Trends in ‘‘Smoking, Smoking Cessation, and Lung mmwr.mm6748a3.
Quality-Adjusted Life-Years Lost Cancer in the UK since 1950: * 589. CDC. ‘‘The Community Guide:
Contributed by Smoking and Obesity.’’ Combination of National Statistics with Tobacco Use: Smoke Free Policies.’’
American Journal of Preventive Two Case-Control Studies.’’ BMJ, thecommunityguide.org. Updated
Medicine, 38(2):138–44, 2010. Available 321(7257):323–9, 2000. Available at November 3, 2018. Accessed March 3,
at 10.1016/j.amepre.2009.09.043. 10.1136/bmj.321.7257.323. 2023. https://www.thecommunityguide.
* 566. Jha, P., C. Ramasundarahettige, V. * 578. CDC. ‘‘Benefits of Quitting.’’ CDC.gov. org/findings/tobacco-use-smoke-free-
Landsman, et al. ‘‘21st-Century Hazards Updated June 30, 2017. Accessed policies.html
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00108 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5139
* 590. International Agency for Research on Attributable Mortality.’’ Preventive * 610. Smith, T.T., J.S. Koopmeiners, D.K.
Cancer. Evaluating the Effectiveness of Medicine, 25(2):91–9, 1996. Available at Hatsukami, et al. ‘‘Mouth-Level Nicotine
Smoke-Free Policies. Vol 13. Iarc 10.1006/pmed.1996.9999. Intake Estimates from Discarded Filter
Handbooks of Cancer Prevention— * 599. Godtfredsen, N.S., C. Holst, E. Butts to Examine Compensatory
Tobacco Control. Lyon, France: IARC, Prescott, et al. ‘‘Smoking Reduction, Smoking in Low Nicotine Cigarettes.’’
2009. Available at https://publications. Smoking Cessation, and Mortality: A 16- Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and
iarc.fr/Book-And-Report-Series/Iarc- Year Follow-up of 19,732 Men and Prevention, 29(3):643–649, 2020.
Handbooks-Of-Cancer-Prevention/ Women from the Copenhagen Centre for Available at 10.1158/1055–9965.Epi-19–
Evaluating-The-Effectiveness-Of-Smoke- Prospective Population Studies.’’ 0905.
free-Policies-2009. American Journal of Epidemiology, 611. Faulkner, P., D.G. Ghahremani, R.F.
* 591. Ahrens, M. ‘‘Home Fires Started by 156(11):994–1001, 2002. Available at Tyndale, et al. ‘‘Neural Basis of Smoking-
Smoking.’’ nfpa.org. Updated January 10.1093/aje/kwf150. Induced Relief of Craving and Negative
2019. Accessed November 23, 2024. * 600. Godtfredsen, N.S., M. Osler, J. Vestbo, Affect: Contribution of Nicotine.’’
https://www.nfpa.org/education-and- et al. ‘‘Smoking Reduction, Smoking Addiction Biology, 24(5):1087–1095,
research/research/nfpa-research/fire- Cessation, and Incidence of Fatal and 2019. Available at 10.1111/adb.12679.
statistical-reports/smoking-materials. Non-Fatal Myocardial Infarction in 612. Cummings, K.M., A. Hyland, G.A.
* 592. Hall, J.R. The Smoking-Material Fire Denmark 1976–1998: A Pooled Cohort Giovino, et al. ‘‘Are Smokers Adequately
Problem. Quincy, MA: National Fire Study.’’ Journal of Epidemiology and Informed About the Health Risks of
Protection Association, Fire Analysis Community Health, 57(6):412–6, 2003. Smoking and Medicinal Nicotine?’’
and Research Division. 2010. Available Available at 10.1136/jech.57.6.412. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 6:333–
at https://www.google.com/url?sa=t& * 601. Godtfredsen, N.S., J. Vestbo, M. Osler, 340, 2004. Available at 10.1080/
rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=& et al. ‘‘Risk of Hospital Admission for 14622200412331320734.
ved=2ahUKEwiil- Copd Following Smoking Cessation and * 613. Differding, M., S.J. Katz, L.G. Strayer,
7fh4SIAxVWD1kFHUZENB Reduction: A Danish Population Study.’’ et al. ‘‘Educating the Public on the
cQFnoECBcQAw&url= Thorax, 57(11):967–72, 2002. Available Health Risks of Very Low Nicotine
Content Cigarettes: Results from a US-
https%3A%2F%2Fcms2.revize at 10.1136/thorax.57.11.967.
Based Convenience Sample.’’ Nicotine
.com%2Frevize%2Fparkersburgfire%2 602. Chang, J.T., G.M. Anic, B.L. Rostron, et
and Tobacco Research, 24(6):871–880,
FDocument al. ‘‘Cigarette Smoking Reduction and
2022. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntac010.
%2520Center%2FFire%2520Safety Health Risks: A Systematic Review and
614. Kim, M., N. Baumlin, J.S. Dennis, et al.
%2FDisability%2520Medical Meta-Analysis.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco
‘‘Never-Smokers Develop Mucosal
%2520Docs%2FSmokingSummary Research, 23(4):635–642, 2021. Available
Inflammation and CFTR Dysfunction
.pdf&usg=AOvVaw1t1u5yCAvXcIV at 10.1093/ntr/ntaa156.
Upon Vaping Nicotine-Free E-Liquid for
ppmmci3eK&opi=89978449. * 603. Tverdal, A., and K. Bjartveit. ‘‘Health
One Week.’’ Conference Abstract:
* 593. Hall, J.R., M. Ahrens, K. Rohr, et al. Consequences of Reduced Daily Cigarette
American Journal of Respiratory and
Behavioral Mitigation of Smoking Fires Consumption.’’ Tobacco Control,
Critical Care Medicine, 197 (Meeting
through Strategies Based on Statistical 15(6):472–80, 2006. Available at
Abstracts) 2018. https://
Analysis: Final Project Report for Eme- 10.1136/tc.2006.016246.
www.atsjournals.org/doi/epdf/10.1164/
2003-Ca-0310. DHS, U.S. Fire * 604. Godtfredsen, N.S., E. Prescott, and M. ajrccm-conference.2018.197.1_
Administration, National Fire Protection Osler. ‘‘Effect of Smoking Reduction on
MeetingAbstracts.A7734?role=tab.
Association. 2006. Available at https:// Lung Cancer Risk.’’ JAMA, 294(12):1505–
* 615. Parker, M.A., J.E. Byers, and A.C.
purl.fdlp.gov/GPO/LPS106249. 10, 2005. Available at 10.1001/
Villanti. ‘‘Effect of Brief Nicotine
* 594. U.S. Department of Health Education jama.294.12.1505.
Corrective Messaging on Nicotine Beliefs
and Welfare. Smoking and Health: 605. Song, Y.M., J. Sung, and H.J. Cho.
in Persons Who Use Opioids.’’
Report of the Advisory Committee to the ‘‘Reduction and Cessation of Cigarette
Experimental and Clinical
Surgeon General of the Public Health Smoking and Risk of Cancer: A Cohort Psychopharmacology, 30(6):1008–1015,
Service. Public Health Service. 1964. Study of Korean Men.’’ Journal of 2022. Available at 10.1037/pha0000497.
Available at https://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/ Clinical Oncology, 26(31):5101–6, 2008. * 616. Steinberg, M.B., M.T. Bover
spotlight/nn/catalog/nlm:nlmuid- Available at 10.1200/jco.2008.17.0498. Manderski, O.A. Wackowski, et al.
101584932X202-doc. * 606. Denlinger-Apte, R.L., R.N. Cassidy, ‘‘Nicotine Risk Misperception among US
* 595. National Academies of Sciences E.C. Donny, et al. ‘‘Qualitative Reactions Physicians.’’ Journal of General Internal
Engineering and Medicine. Premium to a Low Nicotine Product Standard for Medicine, 36(12):3888–3890, 2021.
Cigars: Patterns of Use, Marketing, and Cigarettes from Adolescents and Young Available at 10.1007/s11606-020-06172-
Health Effects. In: Mead, A.M., A.B. Adults Living in the United States Who 8.
Geller, S.M. Teutsch, (Eds.). Premium Smoke.’’ Preventive Medicine Reports, * 617. Villanti, A.C., J.C. West, D. Mays, et
Cigars: Patterns of Use, Marketing, and 32:102163, 2023. Available at 10.1016/ al. ‘‘Impact of Brief Nicotine Messaging
Health Effects. Washington (DC): j.pmedr.2023.102163. on Nicotine-Related Beliefs in a U.S.
National Academies Press. 2022. 607. Pepper, J.K., L.B. Squiers, C. Bann, et al. Sample.’’ American Journal of Preventive
Available at 10.17226/26421. ‘‘Reasons for Supporting or Opposing a Medicine, 57(4):e135-e142, 2019.
* 596. Rostron, B.L., C.G. Corey, and R.M. Reduced Nicotine Product Standard.’’ Available at 10.1016/
Gindi. ‘‘Cigar Smoking Prevalence and Tobacco Regulatory Science, 6(2):164– j.amepre.2019.05.015.
Morbidity among US Adults, 2000– 170, 2020. Available at 10.18001/ * 618. Yang, B., D. Owusu, and L. Popova.
2015.’’ Preventive Medicine Reports, trs.6.2.7. ‘‘Effects of a Nicotine Fact Sheet on
14:100821, 2019. Available at 10.1016/ * 608. Ranney, L.M., K.L. Jarman, S. Clark, Perceived Risk of Nicotine and E-
j.pmedr.2019.100821. et al. ‘‘Reducing Misperceptions About Cigarettes and Intentions to Seek
* 597. Rostron, B.L., C.G. Corey, E. Holder- Very Low Nicotine Content Cigarettes: Information About and Use E-
Hayes, et al. ‘‘Estimating the Potential Insights from Adults Who Smoke.’’ Cigarettes.’’ International Journal of
Public Health Impact of Prohibiting Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Environmental Research and Public
Characterizing Flavors in Cigars 24(12):1951–1958, 2022. Available at Health, 17(1):131, 2019. Available at
Throughout the US.’’ International 10.1093/ntr/ntac165. 10.3390/ijerph17010131.
Journal of Environmental Research and 609. White, C.M., C. Watson, R. Bravo * 619. Pacek, L.R., O. Rass, and M.W.
Public Health, 16(18):3234, 2019. Cardenas, et al. ‘‘Early Changes in Johnson. ‘‘Knowledge About Nicotine
Available at https://www.mdpi.com/ Puffing Intensity When Exclusively among HIV-Positive Smokers:
1660-4601/16/18/3234. Using Open-Label Very Low Nicotine Implications for Tobacco Regulatory
598. Nelson, D.E., R.M. Davis, J.H. Chrismon, Content Cigarettes.’’ Nicotine and Science Policy.’’ Addictive Behaviors,
et al. ‘‘Pipe Smoking in the United Tobacco Research, 24(11):1798–1802, 65:81–86, 2017. Available at 10.1016/
States, 1965–1991: Prevalence and 2022. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntac118. j.addbeh.2016.10.008.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00109 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5140 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
* 620. Faulkner, P., D.G. Ghahremani, R.F. Psychiatric Diagnosis and Symptom Smoke Particulate from Counterfeit
Tyndale, et al. ‘‘Reduced-Nicotine Severity on Subjective and Behavioral Cigarettes Compared to Authentic US
Cigarettes in Young Smokers: Impact of Responses to Reduced Nicotine Content Brands.’’ Food and Chemical Toxicology,
Nicotine Metabolism on Nicotine Dose Cigarettes.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco 45(2):202–209, 2007. Available at
Effects.’’ Neuropsychopharmacology, Research, 21(Suppl 1):S29-s37, 2019. 10.1016/j.fct.2006.08.001.
42(8):1610–1618, 2017. Available at Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntz139. * 641. Levy, D.T., R. Meza, Z. Yuan, et al.
10.1038/npp.2017.18. * 631. Foulds, J., S. Veldheer, G. Pachas, et ‘‘Public Health Impact of a US Ban on
621. Cassidy, R.N., J.W. Tidey, Q. Cao, et al. al. ‘‘The Effects of Reduced Nicotine Menthol in Cigarettes and Cigars: A
‘‘Age Moderates Smokers’ Subjective Content Cigarettes on Biomarkers of Simulation Study.’’ Tobacco Control,
Response to Very Low Nicotine Content Nicotine and Toxicant Exposure, 32(e1):e37-e44, 2023. Available at
Cigarettes: Evidence from a Randomized Smoking Behavior and Psychiatric 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2021-056604.
Controlled Trial.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Symptoms in Smokers with Mood or 642. Drovandi, A., S. Salem, D. Barker, et al.
Research, 21(7):962–969, 2019. Available Anxiety Disorders: A Double-Blind ‘‘Human Biomarker Exposure from
at 10.1093/ntr/nty079. Randomized Trial.’’ PloS One, Cigarettes Versus Novel Heat-Not-Burn
* 622. Davis, D.R., M.A. Parker, A.C. Villanti, 17(11):e0275522, 2022. Available at Devices: A Systematic Review and Meta-
et al. ‘‘Examining Age as a Potential 10.1371/journal.pone.0275522. Analysis.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco
Moderator of Response to Reduced * 632. Parker, M.A., J.M. Streck, C.L. Research, 22(7):1077–1085, 2020.
Nicotine Content Cigarettes in Bergeria, et al. ‘‘Reduced Nicotine Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntz200.
Vulnerable Populations.’’ Nicotine and Content Cigarettes and Cannabis Use in 643. Soneji, S., K.E. Knutzen, S. Gravely, et
Tobacco Research, 21(Suppl 1):S49-s55, Vulnerable Populations.’’ Tobacco al. ‘‘Transitions in Frequency of Hookah
2019. Available at 10.1093/ntr/ntz134. Regulatory Science, 4(5):84–91, 2018. Smoking among Youth and Adults:
* 623. Cassidy, R.N., J.W. Tidey, K.M. Available at 10.18001/trs.4.5.8. Findings from Waves 1 and 2 of the
Jackson, et al. ‘‘The Impact of Reducing * 633. Higgins, S.T., J.W. Tidey, S.C. Sigmon, Population Assessment of Tobacco and
Nicotine Content on Adolescent et al. ‘‘Changes in Cigarette Consumption Health (PATH) Study, 2013–15.’’
Cigarette Smoking and Nicotine with Reduced Nicotine Content Addiction, 116(4):936–948, 2021.
Exposure: Results from a Randomized Cigarettes among Smokers with Available at 10.1111/add.15250.
Controlled Trial.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Psychiatric Conditions or Socioeconomic * 644. Creamer, M.R., T.W. Wang, S. Babb,
Research, 25(5):918–927, 2023. Available Disadvantage: 3 Randomized Clinical et al. ‘‘Tobacco Product Use and
at 10.1093/ntr/ntac279. Trials.’’ JAMA Network Open,
Cessation Indicators among Adults—
624. Snell, L.M., T. DeAtley, J.W. Tidey, et 3(10):e2019311, 2020. Available at
United States, 2018.’’ MMWR Morbidity
al. ‘‘Impact of Reduced Nicotine Content 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.19311.
and Mortality Weekly Report,
on Behavioral Economic Measures of 634. Katz, B.R., D.E. Gaalema, J.A. Dumas, et
68(45):1013–1019, 2019. Available at
Cigarette Reinforcement in Adolescents al. ‘‘Cigarette Smoking and Cognitive
10.15585/mmwr.mm6845a2.
Who Smoke Cigarettes.’’ Drug and Task Performance: Experimental Effects
* 645. Sharma, E., M. Bansal-Travers, K.C.
Alcohol Dependence, 246:109786, 2023. of Very-Low Nicotine-Content
Edwards, et al. ‘‘Longitudinal Pathways
Available at 10.1016/ Cigarettes.’’ Experimental and Clinical
of Exclusive and Polytobacco Hookah
j.drugalcdep.2023.109786. Psychopharmacology, 32(4):436–444,
Use among Youth, Young Adults and
625. Breslau, N., M.M. Kilbey, and P. 2024. Available at 10.1037/pha0000724.
Adults in the USA: Findings from the
Andreski. ‘‘Nicotine Withdrawal * 635. Krebs, N.M., J. Zhu, E. Wasserman, et
PATH Study Waves 1–3 (2013–2016).’’
Symptoms and Psychiatric Disorders: al. ‘‘Switching to Progressively Reduced
Tobacco Control, 29(Suppl 3):s155-s162,
Findings from an Epidemiologic Study of Nicotine Content Cigarettes in Smokers
2020. Available at 10.1136/
Young Adults.’’ The American Journal of with Low Socioeconomic Status: A
tobaccocontrol-2020-055625.
Psychiatry, 149(4):464–9, 1992. Double-Blind Randomized Clinical
* 646. Taylor, K.A., E. Sharma, K.C. Edwards,
Available at 10.1176/ajp.149.4.464. Trial.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco Research,
et al. ‘‘Longitudinal Pathways of
* 626. Weinberger, A.H., R.A. Desai, and S.A. 23(6):992–1001, 2021. Available at
Exclusive and Polytobacco Cigarette Use
McKee. ‘‘Nicotine Withdrawal in U.S. 10.1093/ntr/ntaa247.
among Youth, Young Adults and Adults
Smokers with Current Mood, Anxiety, * 636. Lin, W., A.L. Hobkirk, J. Zhu, et al.
in the USA: Findings from the PATH
Alcohol Use, and Substance Use ‘‘Effect of Menthol on Nicotine
Disorders.’’ Drug and Alcohol Reduction: Pooled Results from Two Study Waves 1–3 (2013–2016).’’ Tobacco
Dependence, 108(1–2):7–12, 2010. Double-Blind Randomized Controlled Control, 29(Suppl 3):s139-s146, 2020.
Available at 10.1016/ Trials.’’ Brain Research Bulletin, Available at 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-
j.drugalcdep.2009.11.004. 189:131–138, 2022. Available at 10.1016/ 2020-055630.
* 627. Marshall, E.C., M.J. Zvolensky, A.A. j.brainresbull.2022.08.019. * 647. Eissenberg, T., and A. Shihadeh.
Vujanovic, et al. ‘‘Evaluation of Smoking * 637. King, A., P. McNamara, M. Conrad, et ‘‘Waterpipe Tobacco and Cigarette
Characteristics among Community- al. ‘‘Alcohol-Induced Increases in Smoking: Direct Comparison of Toxicant
Recruited Daily Smokers with and Smoking Behavior for Nicotinized and Exposure.’’ American Journal of
without Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Denicotinized Cigarettes in Men and Preventive Medicine, 37(6):518–23, 2009.
and Panic Psychopathology.’’ Journal of Women.’’ Psychopharmacology (Berlin), Available at 10.1016/
Anxiety Disorders, 22(7):1214–26, 2008. 207(1):107–17, 2009. Available at j.amepre.2009.07.014.
Available at 10.1016/ 10.1007/s00213-009-1638-9. * 648. Qasim, H., A.B. Alarabi, K.H. Alzoubi,
j.janxdis.2008.01.003. * 638. Pacek, L.R., R. Vandrey, S.S. Dermody, et al. ‘‘The Effects of Hookah/Waterpipe
* 628. Spring, B., J.W. Cook, B. Appelhans, et al. ‘‘Evaluation of a Reduced Nicotine Smoking on General Health and the
et al. ‘‘Nicotine Effects on Affective Product Standard: Moderating Effects of Cardiovascular System.’’ Environmental
Response in Depression-Prone Smokers.’’ and Impact on Cannabis Use.’’ Drug and Health and Preventive Medicine,
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), Alcohol Dependence, 167:228–32, 2016. 24(1):58, 2019. Available at 10.1186/
196(3):461–71, 2008. Available at Available at 10.1016/ s12199-019-0811-y.
10.1007/s00213-007-0977-7. j.drugalcdep.2016.08.620. * 649. Waziry, R., M. Jawad, R.A. Ballout, et
* 629. Tidey, J.W., L.R. Pacek, J.S. * 639. Meier, E., N. Rubin, S.S. Dermody, et al. ‘‘The Effects of Waterpipe Tobacco
Koopmeiners, et al. ‘‘Effects of 6-Week al. ‘‘Immediate Switching to Reduced Smoking on Health Outcomes: An
Use of Reduced-Nicotine Content Nicotine Cigarettes in a U.S.-Based Updated Systematic Review and Meta-
Cigarettes in Smokers with and without Sample: The Impact on Cannabis Use Analysis.’’ International Journal of
Elevated Depressive Symptoms.’’ and Related Variables at 20 Weeks.’’ Epidemiology, 46(1):32–43, 2017.
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Nicotine and Tobacco Research, Available at 10.1093/ije/dyw021.
19(1):59–67, 2017. Available at 10.1093/ 25(5):867–874, 2023. Available at 650. Robinson, J.N., B. Wang, K.J. Jackson, et
ntr/ntw199. 10.1093/ntr/ntac231. al. ‘‘Characteristics of Hookah Tobacco
* 630. Gaalema, D.E., J.W. Tidey, D.R. Davis, 640. Pappas, R.S., G.M. Polzin, C.H. Watson, Smoking Sessions and Correlates of Use
et al. ‘‘Potential Moderating Effects of et al. ‘‘Cadmium, Lead, and Thallium in Frequency among US Adults: Findings
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00110 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5141
from Wave 1 of the Population American Tobacco Records; Master Authority: 21 U.S.C. 331, 371(a), 374,
Assessment of Tobacco and Health Settlement Agreement, 1978. Available 381(e), 381(p)(2), 387b, 387c, 387f(d), 387f(e),
(PATH) Study.’’ Nicotine and Tobacco at https://www.industrydocuments. 387g, 387i, 387j.
Research, 20(6):731–740, 2018. Available ucsf.edu/docs/qnhk0214.
at 10.1093/ntr/ntx060. * 661. Comptrollers Dept. Leaf Inventory Subpart A—General Provisions
* 651. FDA. Report to Congress: United Levels. RJ Reynolds Records; Master
States Tobacco Product Exports That Do Settlement Agreement, 1982. Available §1160.1 Scope.
Not Conform to Tobacco Product at https://www.industrydocuments. (a) This part sets forth the product
Standards. Silver Spring, MD: HHS, ucsf.edu/docs/mhfb0085. standard to limit nicotine yield by
FDA, Center for Tobacco Products. 2016. * 662. Crellin, R.A., and R.L. Prowse. A setting a maximum nicotine content
Available at https://www.fda.gov/files/ Review of Tobacco Aging. British level for certain finished tobacco
tobacco%20products/published/Report-
American Tobacco Records; Master products. The provisions of this part are
to-Congress-on-United-States-Tobacco-
Settlement Agreement, 1988. Available applicable to cigarettes (other than
Product-Exports-that-Do-Not-Conform-
at https://www.industrydocuments.
to-Tobacco-Product-Standards-Required- noncombusted cigarettes, such as heated
ucsf.edu/docs/rfxd0213.
by-Section-801%28p%29%281%29.pdf tobacco products that meet the
* 663. Rhoades, C.M., Jr. Procedure Note. Uti
652. Chaloupka, F.J. ‘‘Macro-Social definition of a cigarette), cigarette
Specification Review/Update. RJ
Influences: The Effects of Prices and tobacco, roll-your-own tobacco, cigars
Reynolds Records; Master Settlement
Tobacco-Control Policies on the Demand Agreement, 1994. Available at https:// (other than premium cigars), and pipe
for Tobacco Products.’’ Nicotine and
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ tobacco (other than waterpipe tobacco).
Tobacco Research, 1 Suppl 1:S105–9,
1999. Available at 10.1080/ rqwx0084. (b) No person may distribute, sell, or
14622299050011681. * 664. British American Tobacco. PM Leaf offer for sale or distribution within the
* 653. FDA. Preliminary Regulatory Impact Technology. British American Tobacco United States finished tobacco products,
Analysis of the Tobacco Product Records; Master Settlement Agreement. as described in paragraph (a) of this
Standard for Nicotine Yield of Cigarettes Available at https:// section, that are not in compliance with
and Certain Other Combusted Tobacco www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ this part.
Products. Silver Spring, MD: HHS, FDA, khkj0192. (c) No person may manufacture
Center for Tobacco Products. 2025. * 665. FDA. Environmental Assessment of within the United States finished
Available at https://www.fda.gov/about- the Tobacco Product Standard for tobacco products, as described in
fda/economics-staff/regulatory-impact- Nicotine Yield of Certain Tobacco
paragraph (a) of this section, that are not
analyses-ria. Products. Silver Spring, MD: HHS, FDA,
in compliance with this part, unless
* 654. CORESTA. Recommended Methods Center for Tobacco Products. 2025.
No. 24—Cigarettes—Sampling. * 666. FDA. Finding of No Significant such tobacco products are intended for
Cooperation Centre for Scientific Impact: Tobacco Product Standard for export and are eligible for export under
Research Relative to Tobacco; 1991. Nicotine Yield of Certain Tobacco section 801(e)(1) of the Federal Food,
https://www.coresta.org/sites/default/ Products. Silver Spring, MD: HHS, FDA, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
files/technical_documents/main/CRM_ Center for Tobacco Products. 2025.
24.pdf. §1160.3 Definitions.
* 655. CORESTA. Recommended Methods List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 1160 For purposes of this part:
No. 43—Fine-Cut Tobacco—Sampling. Accessory means any product that is
Cooperation Centre for Scientific Administrative practice and intended or reasonably expected to be
Research Relative to Tobacco; 1997. procedure, Labeling, Smoke, Smoking, used with or for the human
https://www.coresta.org/sites/default/ Tobacco, Tobacco products. consumption of a tobacco product; does
files/technical_documents/main/CRM_
43_0.pdf. ■ Therefore, under the Federal Food, not contain tobacco or nicotine from any
source and is not made or derived from
* 656. CORESTA. Recommended Methods Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and under
tobacco; and meets either of the
No. 47—Cigars—Sampling. Cooperation authority delegated to the Commissioner
Centre for Scientific Research Relative to of Food and Drugs, it is proposed that following:
Tobacco; 2000. https://www.coresta.org/ chapter I of title 21 of the Code of (1) Is not intended or reasonably
cigars-sampling-29172.html#:∼:text=
Federal Regulations be amended by
expected to affect or alter the
This%20Recommended%20Method performance, composition, constituents,
adding part 1160 to subchapter K to
%20specifies%20two,or%20 or characteristics of a tobacco product;
read as follows:
importer%27s%20 or
and%20distributor%27s%20 PART 1160—TOBACCO PRODUCT (2) Is intended or reasonably expected
warehouses.
STANDARD FOR NICOTINE YIELD OF to affect or maintain the performance,
* 657. Philip Morris USA, and S.A. Haut.
Purchase of Low Alkaloid Burley CIGARETTES AND CERTAIN OTHER composition, constituents, or
Tobacco. Philip Morris Records; Master COMBUSTED TOBACCO PRODUCTS characteristics of a tobacco product; but
(i) Solely controls moisture and/or
Settlement Agreement, 1990. Available
at https://www.industrydocuments. Subpart A—General Provisions temperature of a stored tobacco product;
ucsf.edu/docs/hlwj0008. Sec. or
* 658. Philip Morris. Tobacco Seed 1160.1 Scope. (ii) Solely provides an external heat
Improvement Program. Philip Morris 1160.3 Definitions. source to initiate but not maintain
Records; Master Settlement Agreement, combustion of a tobacco product.
Subpart B—Product Requirements
1990. Available at https:// Batch means a specific identified
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/ 1160.10 Nicotine level. amount of a finished tobacco product
jnpb0128. 1160.12 Product testing. produced in a unit of time or quantity
* 659. Barnes, V.B. Product & Process Flow. 1160.14 Analytical test method.
and that is intended to have the same
RJ Reynolds Records; Master Settlement 1160.16 Sampling plans and procedures.
specifications.
Agreement, 1981. Available at https:// 1160.18 Nonconforming tobacco product.
Cigar means a tobacco product that:
www.industrydocuments.ucsf.edu/docs/
Subpart C—Manufacturing Code and (1) Is not a cigarette; and
sxcv0079.
* 660. British American Tobacco. Recordkeeping Requirements (2) Is a roll of tobacco wrapped in leaf
Honduras—Glt Equipment/Green Leaf 1160.30 Manufacturing code requirements. tobacco or any substance containing
Storage/Leaf Warehouse. British 1160.32 Recordkeeping requirements. tobacco.
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00111 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5142 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
Cigarette, as used in this part: complex of nicotine, derived from any Total tobacco means tobacco filler
(1) Means a product that: source. and any other tobacco or tobacco-
(i) Is a tobacco product; and Nonconforming tobacco product derived material used as part of a
(ii) Meets the definition of the term means any tobacco product that does tobacco product.
‘‘cigarette’’ in section 3(1) of the Federal not meet the requirements of §1160.10 United States means the 50 States of
Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act; or §1160.30. the United States of America and the
and Package or packaging means a pack, District of Columbia, the
(2) Includes tobacco, in any form, that box, carton, or container of any kind or, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam,
is functional in the product, which, if no other container, any wrapping the Virgin Islands, American Samoa,
because of its appearance, the type of (including cellophane) in which a Wake Island, Midway Islands, Kingman
tobacco used in the filler, or its tobacco product is offered for sale, sold, Reef, Johnston Atoll, the Northern
packaging and labeling, is likely to be or otherwise distributed to consumers. Mariana Islands, and any other trust
offered to, or purchased by, consumers Person includes an individual, territory or possession of the United
as a cigarette or as roll-your-own partnership, corporation, or association. States.
tobacco.
Pipe tobacco means any tobacco
Cigarette tobacco means any tobacco Subpart B—Product Requirements
product that, because of its appearance,
product that consists of loose tobacco
type, packaging, or labeling, is suitable
that is intended for use by consumers in §1160.10 Nicotine level.
for use and likely to be offered to, or
a cigarette. Unless otherwise stated, the A finished tobacco product must not
purchased by, consumers as tobacco to
requirements applicable to cigarettes exceed a nicotine content of 0.70
be smoked in a pipe.
under this chapter also apply to milligrams of nicotine per gram of total
Rework means action taken on a
cigarette tobacco. tobacco.
nonconforming tobacco product to
Commercial distribution means any
ensure the product meets the §1160.12 Product testing.
distribution of a finished tobacco
product, whether domestic or imported, specifications and other requirements of (a) Batch testing. Tobacco product
to consumers or to any person, but does this part before it is released for manufacturers must conduct testing on
not include interplant transfers of a commercial distribution. finished tobacco products to ensure that
tobacco product between establishments Roll-your-own tobacco means any the batch conforms with §1160.10. The
within the same parent, subsidiary, and/ tobacco product which, because of its manufacturer must use an analytical test
or affiliate company, nor does it include appearance, type, packaging, or labeling, method that meets the requirements set
providing a tobacco product for product is suitable for use and likely to be forth in §1160.14. Samples for testing
testing where such product is not made offered to, or purchased by, consumers each batch to determine if it conforms
available for personal consumption or as tobacco for making cigarettes or with §1160.10 must be selected in
resale. ‘‘Commercial distribution’’ does cigars. accordance with the requirements set
not include the handing or transfer of a Specification means any requirement forth in §1160.16.
tobacco product from one consumer to with which a product, process, service, (b) Documentation of test results. A
another for personal consumption. or other activity must conform. full report of the source data and results
Component or part means any Tobacco filler means cut, ground, of all batch testing must be maintained
software or assembly of materials powdered, or leaf tobacco or other by the tobacco product manufacturer in
intended or reasonably expected: nicotine-containing substances in a accordance with §1160.32, including
(1) To alter or affect the tobacco finished tobacco product. the following:
product’s performance, composition, Tobacco product means any product (1) Full identification of the finished
constituents, or characteristics; or made or derived from tobacco, or tobacco product that is the subject of the
(2) To be used with or for the human containing nicotine from any source, report, including, if applicable, the
consumption of a tobacco product. The that is intended for human submission tracking number (STN)
term excludes anything that is an consumption, including any associated with marketing authorization
accessory of a tobacco product. component, part, or accessory of a (including the static product ID (PD), if
Finished tobacco product means a tobacco product (except for raw applicable), product name(s) (including
tobacco product, including all materials other than tobacco used in brand and subbrand and the original
components and parts, sealed in final manufacturing a component, part, or name described in the premarket
packaging (e.g., filters or filter tubes sold accessory of a tobacco product). The application, if different), product
to consumers separately or as part of term ‘‘tobacco product’’ does not mean category, subcategory, package type,
kits) or in the final form in which it is an article that under the Federal Food, package quantity, and nicotine source;
intended to be sold to consumers. Drug, and Cosmetic Act is: a drug (2) Nicotine level of each sample
Manufacturing code means any (section 201(g)(1)); a device (section tested and standard deviation;
distinctive sequence or combination of 201(h)); a combination product (section (3) The batch manufacturing date and
letters, numbers, or symbols that begins 503(g)); or a food under section 201(f) if location, including facility name and
with the manufacturing date, followed such article contains no nicotine, or no address, for each sample;
by the batch number, and concludes more than trace amounts of naturally (4) The testing date and location,
with ‘‘-NS.’’ occurring nicotine. including the facility name and address;
Manufacturing date means the month, Tobacco product manufacturer means (5) The manufacturing code of each
day, and year in 2-digit numerical any person, including a repacker or sample tested;
values in the format (MMDDYY) that a relabeler, who: (6) The test method and sampling
finished tobacco product is packaged for (1) Manufactures, fabricates, procedure used;
distribution. assembles, processes, or labels a tobacco (7) The names and qualifications of
Nicotine means the chemical product; or the person(s) conducting the testing and
substance named 3-(1-methyl-2- (2) Imports a finished tobacco product any laboratory accreditation;
pyrrolidinyl) pyridine or for sale or distribution in the United (8) The equipment used (including
C[10]H[14]N[2], including any salt or States. documentation to show that the
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00112 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurddFederal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules 5143
equipment is appropriate for its manufacturer must include all of its (i) Full identification of the finished
intended purpose and has been factories, stock rooms, warehouses, and tobacco product sampled, including, if
calibrated to ensure accurate and other locations containing finished applicable, the STN associated with
reliable results); and tobacco products in the population to be marketing authorization (including the
(9) The criteria used to make a sampled. PD, if applicable), product name(s)
decision to accept or reject each batch (3) Test samples must be taken from (including brand and subbrand and the
and the decision made with respect to each batch and tested within 30 original name described in the
each batch (e.g., accept, reject) based on calendar days of the manufacturing premarket application, if different),
the results of the product testing. date. The amount of material acquired product category, subcategory, package
during sampling must be sufficient for type, package quantity, and nicotine
§1160.14 Analytical test method.
all testing required by §1160.14, source;
Tobacco product manufacturers must including any repeat testing that may be (ii) The manufacturing code;
use an analytical test method and must necessary. Samples must be selected (iii) The date on which samples were
demonstrate that the test method used from each batch in accordance with the taken, if available;
was validated in an analytical test applicable sampling plan. (iv) The sampling location (including
laboratory. (4) Sampling must be performed by the address and specific locations
§1160.16 Sampling plans and procedures. persons who have sufficient education, within any facilities where samples
training, and experience to accomplish were taken);
(a) Sampling plans. Each tobacco
the assigned functions. (v) The number of test samples drawn;
product manufacturer must design and
(5) Each test sample must be and
implement a sampling plan or plans that
(vi) Complete records of the samples
identified so that the following
cover each finished tobacco product
received and tested, including the date
information can be determined:
based on a valid scientific rationale to
of receipt, the identifier of all persons
(i) Full identification of the finished
ensure that the product consistently
who tested the samples, and the test
tobacco product sampled, including, if
conforms to the requirement set forth in
results.
applicable, the STN associated with
§1160.10. The sampling plan must (9) Each batch must be withheld from
marketing authorization (including the
ensure that samples taken are commercial distribution until it has
PD, if applicable), product name(s)
representative of an entire batch (i.e., been sampled and tested and a decision
(including brand and subbrand and the
randomized or systematically selected has been made by the tobacco product
original name described in the
across the entire batch) and collected manufacturer that it conforms to the
premarket application, if different),
from each batch for testing. To account requirements of this part and may be
product category, subcategory, package
for the variability of nicotine in finished released for commercial distribution.
type, package quantity, and nicotine
tobacco products, the following factors
must be based on adequate statistical source; §1160.18 Nonconforming tobacco
criteria: the confidence intervals, the (ii) The manufacturing code; product.
level of necessary precision, and the (iii) The date on which the sample Each tobacco product manufacturer
number of finished products sampled. was taken; must establish and maintain procedures
The sampling plan must take into (iv) The sampling location (including for the control and disposition of
account the manufacturing quality the address of the facility and specific nonconforming tobacco product. The
history of the manufacturer (e.g., batch location within the facility where the procedures must include the following
testing records, nonconforming tobacco sample was taken); requirements:
product investigations). Each sampling (v) The name of the person(s) who (a) Identification and segregation.
plan must describe the sampling collected the sample; and Each tobacco product manufacturer
methodology, with scientific rationale, (vi) The location where the sample must identify and segregate potential
incorporate all sources of variability will be tested (including the facility nonconforming product in a manner
(including variability of the analytic name and address). that prevents commercial distribution of
method and nicotine levels), and (6) Samples sent for testing must be potential nonconforming product prior
describe the sample size needed packed securely with adequate to investigation and disposition.
(including a full description of how the protection against damage (e.g., (b) Investigation. Each tobacco
sample size is calculated) consistent mechanical damage, adverse changes in product manufacturer must investigate
with the sampling plan to achieve the humidity or temperature). A list of the all potential nonconforming tobacco
sampling objective. The sampling plan samples in each shipment must be sent products to determine if the product is
must also describe the criteria the to the testing facility under separate nonconforming. The investigation must
tobacco product manufacturer will use cover. include an examination of relevant
to make a decision to accept or reject (7) All samples for a batch test must production processes and controls,
each batch. be tested at the same facility. laboratory testing, complaints, and any
(b) Sampling procedures. Test (8) If samples will be transported to a other relevant records and sources of
samples must be collected from each different facility from the manufacturing information. For products determined to
batch and examined in accordance with facility for testing, once test samples be nonconforming, the investigation
the following procedures: arrive at the testing facility, they must must also determine the scope and
(1) Test samples are to consist of the be inspected, accounted for, and cause of nonconformance.
finished tobacco product as it is properly stored under the finished (c) Rejection of nonconforming
intended to be sold or distributed to tobacco product’s intended storage product. Tobacco product
consumers and not of a separate conditions, and a report that includes manufacturers must reject a batch of a
production sample. the following information must be finished tobacco product if the nicotine
(2) All test samples must be stored generated for the batch test and be level of a test sample from the batch
according to the intended storage maintained by the tobacco product does not conform to the requirements of
conditions for the finished tobacco manufacturer in accordance with this part unless a disposition decision
product. A tobacco product §1160.32: and justification to release the batch is
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00113 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd5144 Federal Register/Vol. 90, No. 10/Thursday, January 16, 2025/Proposed Rules
made after an investigation determines will remain on the packaging or labeling be attributable, legible,
that the batch meets the requirements of through the expected duration of use of contemporaneously recorded, original,
this part. the tobacco product by the consumer. and accurate. These records must be
(d) Disposition and followup. Each (b) The manufacturing code for each written in English, or an accurate
tobacco product manufacturer must finished tobacco product must be English translation must be made
determine the disposition of all permanently affixed, legible, available upon request. Documents that
nonconforming tobacco products and conspicuous, prominent, and appear in have been translated from another
any necessary followup. If the the English language. language into English must be
disposition decision is that the tobacco (c) The manufacturing code must accompanied by the original language
product can be released for distribution contain the following information listed version of the document, a signed
without rework, an adequate written in the following order: statement by the authorized
justification must be developed and (1) The manufacturing date in 2-digit representative of the manufacturer
maintained in accordance with numerical values in the month-day-year certifying that the English language
§1160.32. An adequate written format (MMDDYY); translation is complete and accurate,
justification must address why releasing (2) The finished tobacco product and a brief statement of the
the nonconforming product would not batch number; and qualifications of the person that made
result in the tobacco product being (3) The designation ‘‘–NS’’ at the end. the translation. These records must be
adulterated or misbranded. maintained at the manufacturing
§1160.32 Recordkeeping requirements.
Nonconforming product cannot be establishment or another location that is
released for distribution without rework (a) Each facility that manufactures readily accessible to responsible
or an adequate justification. tobacco products subject to this part officials of the tobacco product
(e) Records. Each tobacco product must establish and maintain records manufacturer and to FDA. These
manufacturer must maintain records of related to compliance with this part, records, including those not stored at
all activities required under this section. including the following: the establishment, must be made readily
Records must include the date and time (1) The source data and results of accessible to FDA during the retention
of the activity, the individual batch testing conducted to determine period for inspection and photocopying
performing the activity, the type of conformance with §1160.10, including or other means of reproduction. Original
activity performed, any information that all information specified in §1160.12(b); or true copies of these records that can
demonstrates that the requirement was (2) All source data for analytical test be immediately retrieved from another
met, and any data or calculations method validation; location, including by computer or other
necessary to reconstruct the results. (3) All sampling plans and reports electronic means, meet the requirements
under §1160.16; of this paragraph.
Subpart C—Manufacturing Code and (4) Documentation that the persons (c) All records required under this
Recordkeeping Requirements performing sampling under §1160.16 part must be retained for a period of at
have sufficient education, training, and least 4 years from the date of
§1160.30 Manufacturing code experience to accomplish the assigned commercial distribution of the finished
requirements. functions; and tobacco product that is the subject of the
(a) Each tobacco product (5) All nonconforming tobacco record.
manufacturer must permanently affix a product identification, segregation,
Dated: January 6, 2025.
manufacturing code to the packaging or investigation, rework, and disposition
labeling of all finished tobacco decision procedures, including Robert M. Califf,
products. For a finished tobacco justifications, under §1160.18. Commissioner of Food and Drugs.
product, the manufacturing code must (b) All records required under this [FR Doc. 2025–00397 Filed 1–15–25; 8:45 am]
be affixed in a manner that assures it part, regardless of storage medium, must BILLING CODE 4164–01–P
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:17 Jan 15, 2025 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00114 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 9990 E:\FR\FM\16JAP3.SGM 16JAP3
3SLASOPORP
htiw
DORP32NR021KSD
no
rellehmurdd